Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems

Volume 36       Issue 1                                                                                    Article 4


6-30-2024

My road to Infrastructure
Ole Hanseth
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway, oleha@ifi.uio.no




Follow this and additional works at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis


Recommended Citation
Hanseth, Ole (2024) "My road to Infrastructure," Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems: Vol. 36:
Iss. 1, Article 4.
Available at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4


This material is brought to you by the AIS Journals at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has been accepted for
inclusion in Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library
(AISeL). For more information, please contact elibrary@aisnet.org.
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure

    Reflection note



    My Road to Infrastructure
    Ole Hanseth
    Department of Informatics, University of Oslo
    Ole.Hanseth@ifi.uio.no


    1 Introduction
    More or less all my research has been related to information or digital infrastructures—
    more specifically: innovations in information infrastructures which has been the theme
    of a series of workshops Robin Williams established. My approach to this topic, how-
    ever, was the outcome of a long journey. It all started with, and was most influenced by,
    Kristen Nygaard who was giving two lectures on his pet topic, “systems development
    as a technical, organizational, and political process” in the introductory course to in-
    formatics during the spring 1977 (where we learned object-oriented programming in
    Simula). Kristen was at this time just hired as an adjunct professor and developed three
    courses on systems development—one at the bachelor level (Data processing and soci-
    ety), and two on master level (Large data systems—two cases, and Methods of systems
    development) which I attended. This convinced me that systems development was a
    “technical, organizational and political process”, which implied that also organizational
    and political issues had to be considered in the design processes. One way to do so was
    to organize the development processes so that users actively got involved. Another issue
    was how social, organizational, and political issues were supported or constrained in a
    system’s specific design (architecture, functionality, whatever). The focus on my edu-
    cation was computer science and software engineering. So as a software designer my
    primary concern was how to account for social, organizational, and political issues in
    the design of artifacts.
        Kristen has had strong influence on me in addition to his thinking about technolo-
    gy1. This included his approach to life and work. He was a political activist, most clearly
    demonstrated in his role as head of the No-movement in connection with Norway’s
    referendum about EU membership in 1994, but he also had an activist approach to
    research. Rather than reading, reflecting, and writing in solitude in his office or study,



Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 41
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure                 1
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4


     he gathered people around him, locally and globally, discussing what mattered and how
     to get things done2. This meant that he was connected to a large community of schol-
     ars with vastly different backgrounds, a community where lots of interesting ideas and
     issues emerged and were explored and discussed. This community represented a huge
     resource for a curious young mind.
         NCC/NR, in the wake of Kristen’s pioneering project together with the Iron and
     Metal Workers’ Union, hired a group of social scientists to complement their computer
     science and statistics expertise, making it a very attractive employer for me. And luckily,
     I was offered a position from 1st of January 1982 after having completed my master
     (cand. real.) thesis. My intellectual development and research interest was from then on
     shaped by the issues and challenges I confronted in the projects I engaged with, at the
     same time as my interpretations of and lessons I drew from these confrontations were
     strongly influenced by discussions I had with colleagues and people I met (at NCC/
     NR and in Kristen’s wider network), and literature these people made me aware of and
     which my curiosity led me to read.


     2 Projects
     When I started, I got involved in two projects: a pilot implementation of the ISO OSI
     session layer communication protocol, and to extend the Pascal programming language
     with concepts for concurrent processes need for programming a Norwegian supercom-
     puter designed for processing satellite data (for surveillance of Norwegian sea). The
     next project was the design of a Simula machine, i.e., a computer especially tailored
     to the Simula programming language where my task was to micro-code the Simula
     specific instruction set called Sipofix, including its memory management system. This
     was followed by a project aiming at implementing and extending Kristen’s new pet
     programming language BETA.
         Over the years, my activities became more concentrated on communication tech-
     nology. And what turned out to become a ‘critical juncture’ or path creation event in
     my career was a project we conducted for the Norwegian tele-directorate’s research
     organization. The aim of was to implement a pilot solution where documents could be
     produced or edited, exchanged between users/computers, stored, and retrieved based
     on the ISO OSI ODA multimedia document standard. The solution was based on the
     integration of several modules developed by various organizations (and individuals we
     did not know). We succeeded in the end, but the integration of all software modules
     turned out to be far more challenging than expected, bringing the project at one point
     to the brink of total failure.



https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       42      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                 2
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


        While we were working on this project, our client, the Norwegian tele-directo-
    rate’s research organization, established a centre in Tromsø called Telemedicine in North-
    ern-Norway which was given the task to develop solutions for new telecommunica-
    tion-based services for health care—with a focus on utilizing multi-media technology.
    Staff at this centre became aware of our project. They though ODA was an appropriate
    standard for this task, so Gisle Hannemyr and me were engaged (in 1988) to set up
    a demo solution exchanging medical multi-media information based on ODA on the
    one hand and to contribute to the development of international standards for exchange
    of such information on the other. This engagement led me to leave NCC in 1990 and
    join a software company developing solutions for information exchange in health care,
    returning to the NCC/NR towards the end of 1992.
        The two ODA projects and the two years working for the software company sealed
    my destiny as a researcher. After the first ODA project led me to conclude that future
    software development is not just about developing software from scratch, but rather by
    integrating existing modules developed by others; that doing so is far from trivial; and
    that this issue needs research. Further, an important conclusion I draw from my work
    for the software company was that communication technology has a huge potential for
    enabling information sharing between organization within all industries and that this
    required and opened a huge space for research. Finally, the ODA project also brought
    me, by accident I would say, into the health care domain which has been the main em-
    pirical domain for all my research.


    3 Issues, people, readings
    Some issues I repeatedly discussed with colleagues were also discussed widely in IS
    communities. This included approaches to software development: top-down (water-
    fall) vs. bottom-up and iterative or evolutionary approaches. In these discussions, Kari
    Thoresen insisted that software development was fundamentally a learning process and
    had to be conducted and organized as such, a view I came to share, and which became
    fundamental to my thinking about infrastructures.
        During the 1980s and -90s there was also a heated debate about fundamental prin-
    ciples for the establishment of communication standards—often referred to as a reli-
    gious standards war between the proponents of the ISO OSI protocol suite and the
    Internet community, a war where my colleagues at NCC/NR were all on the ISO OSI
    side—with one exception: ‘Internet evangelist’ Gisle Hannemyr. Discussions with Gisle
    was important for understating what was going on in the Internet community and




Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 43
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure                3
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4


     contrasts between OSI and Internet at technological (architectural), methodological,
     organizational, as well as political levels.
         My discussion with Gisle combined with my experiences in the ODA projects and
     in particular in the software company had for me two important implications. First,
     over time I came to see that the discussions between waterfall and evolutionary software
     development approaches could be seem as analogue to the religious war about stand-
     ards, and accordingly standardization should also be seen as, for instance, a learning
     process. Second, Gisle forwarded to me an email sent by Einar Stefferud to Eva Kuiper
     with copy to IETF’s mailing list (on 12th of May 1992) where he argued that the prob-
     lem with the OSI protocols was that they were “installed base hostile,” i.e., they were
     specified to communicate only with instances of the same protocol and, accordingly, an
     OSI networks could not communicate with or connect to any existing network. This
     notion of the installed base and installed base hostility was and eye opener: it pointed
     to key differences between both ordinary software solutions and solutions integrated
     across computers and organizational borders and between OSI and Internet approaches
     to standards development.
         I was constantly feeling a need for a deeper understanding of the issues I have men-
     tioned. And the community I was a part of or had links to make me aware of rich sourc-
     es of literature that I thought would help. I will here mention some important ones.
         Lars Matthiessen did his PhD in Oslo. The Swedish sociologist Joachim Israel was
     his second supervisor (Kristen was the first). This brought Israel to Oslo, giving a lecture
     at NCC/NR in 1981 presenting his recent book “The Dialectics of Language and the
     Language of Dialectics,” which I attended (while a master student). Israel talked about
     ontology and epistemology in addition to dialectics—words I had never heard before. I
     didn’t understand a word but bought the book and read it—still without understanding
     anything. But a second careful reading helped a lot.
         During 1982 Kristen established together with other Scandinavians a research pro-
     gram called “Systems Development and Profession-oriented Languages” (Sydpol). Stan-
     ford Professor Terry Winograd was invited to the kick-off seminar in early 1983 where I
     also participated. Winograd brought with him a draft of the book he co-authored with
     Fernando Flores, “Understanding Computers and Cognition. A New Foundation for
     Design,” (1997) which he shared with us. The book included a chapter on Gadamer’s
     hermeneutics (another very strange new word) and presented a ‘teaser’ of Heidegger.
     The latter hit my curiosity leading to many evenings struggling with Being and Time.
         Sociologist and colleague Tom Pape was closely affiliated with Scandinavian action
     research community, and one day he gave me a copy of the draft of a book with the
     title “Sociology as Action,” written by Bjørn Gustavsen—one of the community’s most



https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       44      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                  4
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


    experienced members3. Here Gustavsen summarized the experiences of three decades
    of action research and three major working life reforms in Norway and outlined a
    methodology he called “democratic dialogue,” drawing extensively upon Habermas,
    (the late) Wittgenstein, and Foucault. While spending some time reading Habermas,
    the latter two got much more of my attention over a few years. I found in particular
    Foucault’s “Discipline and Punish” and Wittgenstein’s analysis of following a rule (and
    its difference to acting in accordance with a rule) helpful in getting deeper into issues
    related to software and standards development approaches.
        Lucy Suchman engaged with the Scandinavian technology-oriented research fol-
    lowing Kristen’s Iron and Metal Workers project and visited Scandinavia presenting
    her work, first her early paper on “Problems and Procedures in the Office Workspace”
    (which she later elaborated and published as her hugely influential “Plans and Situated
    Action.”) I found Lucy’s analysis as closely related to my understanding of and inter-
    est in Foucault and Wittgenstein. She used however, yet another strange word—eth-
    nomethodology. This triggered my curiosity again. There was not much literature to
    find—just Harold Garfinkel’s thin book “Studies in Ethnomethodology” and Michael
    Lynch’s “Art and Artefact in Laboratory Science.” Lynch’s book turned out to be my
    first meeting with the at that time emerging STS field. This brought me further to
    Latour and Woolgar’s “Laboratory Life” and to Knorr-Cetina’s “The Manufacture of
    Knowledge,” followed by a broad stream of STS literature of which ANT and Thomas
    Hughes’ “Network of Power” and his theory of Large Technological Systems became
    most important.
        The theory of science and philosophy I had been reading—Israel, Heidegger, Witt-
    genstein, Foucault—was certainly not easy for me to operationalize in the projects I
    worked on but turned out to be very helpful in getting a better grasp of the STS liter-
    ature.
        In January 1987, Eric Monteiro started at NCC/NR. (Actually, I hired him, being
    the head of the programming languages and environment group, but when he arrived,
    he decided he did not want to work in my group.) Eric was trained as a traditional civil
    engineer in computing and found what the social scientists were talking about rather
    odd, but having an open and curious intellectual mind, he wanted to understand them.
    Eric and me also started to discuss what he found strange or odd—discussions that have
    continued on a more or less daily basis ever since, drifting into STS and over time more
    or less any topic. These discussions have been very important in the sense of having had
    a huge impact on my intellectual development, but also in the sense of cultivation a
    close friendship.




Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 45
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure               5
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4



         Soon after he started at NCC/NR, Eric got a scholarship and started on a PhD (on
     intuitionistic logic as a foundation for programming languages). After finishing in his
     PhD in 1992 he got a position at the university in Trondheim at the same time as I
     returned from industry to the Norwegian Computing Center. And around that time,
     our discussions also turned towards the writing of joint papers, the first on participatory
     standardization presented at IRIS in 1992.


     4 Crystallization of a research agenda
     The Norwegian Computing Centre was a lively and inspirational place. All employees
     were entitled researchers, but there was absolutely no culture for proper academic pub-
     lishing. Personally, I wrote a few working papers (or internal research reports) from the
     programming language projects I was involved in. Based on the ODA projects I wrote
     a couple of papers on integration challenges and a more theoretical one the standard-
     ization approach taken for informal conferences and workshops (criticizing the naïve
     realist assumptions of its focus on a data modelling approach and its shortcomings).
         While the ODA projects provided me with some ‘food’ for research, it was my
     work in the software company that really gave me access to (or rather dumped on me)
     an inexhaustible source of valuable data. I saw that using communication technology
     supporting collaboration and information sharing, i.e., integration of information sys-
     tems, in particular across organizational borders, held a great potential for beneficial
     use of IT—in the health sector as well as all others. And I also saw that this generated
     many practical challenges as well as research questions—none of which addressed by
     the Scandinavian Participatory Design (PD) dominated Scandinavian IS community,
     the research community closest to me. Helpful in this regard was Bo Dahlbom. He
     argued that the research of the PD community, with its narrow focus on only user in-
     volvement in in-house projects developing moderately complex solutions from scratch,
     was outdated. Software was now (1990), he argued, all about off-the-shelf products
     developed by software companies, and, accordingly, research should focus on use, not
     development, of such products. Bo’s argument helped me sharpen my view. I agreed
     that the PD community was to some extent outdated, but there was also a need for in-
     tegrating software products, in particular into what I at that time called inter-organiza-
     tional information systems. In my view, and based on my experience, such integration
     tasks, and the development of interorganizational systems raised several new challenges
     and required extensive research. And so did the development of the standards such
     solutions required.



https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       46      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                 6
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


        The development of inter-organizational information systems also differed substan-
    tially from the assumptions the PD (and actually more or less all IS) research were
    based on: the development as well as adoption and use of such systems involved many
    autonomous but interdependent organizational—what today most would call ecosys-
    tems—which made the organizing and ‘management’ of the development process rad-
    ically different.
        In 1993 I dropped the term inter-organisation systems and replaced it with infor-
    mation infrastructures which was popularized by the Clinton/Gore National Informa-
    tion Infrastructure (often called electronic superhighways) strategy. I liked this term for
    mainly two reasons: first, it was helpful in conveying that what we were dealing with
    was fundamentally different from information system—that the difference was more
    fundamental than what would be communicated by just adding inter-organizational,
    or complex for that matter, in front of information systems. Second, traditional infra-
    structures are complex, big and heavy, build on standards and evolves slowly over long
    time—aspects that it was important to highlight and focus on.
        While information infrastructures were different from information systems in im-
    portant respects as pointed out, they were also equal in equally important ways. Infra-
    structures as well as their standards are technological artifacts, and as such they are of
    course also socio-technical systems—although more complex ones. And as technolog-
    ical artifacts, they can only be developed through an innovation process based on ele-
    ments of trial and error, i.e., a learning process, and they have to be adapted to changing
    user requirements. However, standards and infrastructures become increasingly resist-
    ant to change as their installed bases grow. In addition, the availability of stable stand-
    ards is a precondition for scaling infrastructures. I identified this dilemma—i.e., the
    need for stable standards at the same time as infrastructures, including their standards,
    need to evolve as we learn how to design them and as users’ requirements change—as
    fundamental to successful infrastructure development.
        Practically all my research has been related to this tension between standardization
    and flexibility, or, alternatively, the stability/change duality. And this issue has been
    explored through empirical inquiries drawing upon various theories and through dis-
    cussions and collaborations with many colleagues.
        In terms of theory, I have drawn upon STS as mentioned above, but also Complex-
    ity Science, Ulrich Beck and Anthony Giddens’ theory of Reflexive Modernization,
    and more recently Gilles Deleuze’s Assemblage Theory (as interpreted and presented by
    Manuel DeLanda). While much of my research may appear theory driven, I still believe
    I am a computer scientist at the core. So, the use of theories has been guided by what I
    believe could help me develop ‘better’ technologies.



Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 47
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure                 7
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4


         My most formative exploration of the standardization/flexibility tension took place
     in the first half of the 1990s in collaboration and discussions with Eric Monteiro, Bo
     Dahlbom and Langdon Winner (who visited the TMV centre (that later became part
     of the TIK Centre) at the University of Oslo during 1991-92). In this period, Eric and
     I were reading and discussing lots of STS literature. At this time, Social Constructivism
     had a strong position (among the members of the STS centre in Trondheim which Eric
     had close contact with), and its claim about ‘everything’ having endless (interpretive)
     flexibility seemed to be in contradiction with the stability and rigidity of standards and
     infrastructures. This contradiction was also illuminated by Langdon Winner’s criticism
     of Social Constructivist (and STS more broadly) for neglecting the materiality and
     politics of technology. Further, Bo Dahlbom, a philosopher that became professor of
     Information System, was fascinated with information technology’s flexibility, and what
     we later would have called generativity. In our discussions, I often found it appropriate
     to take the opposite position.
         In 1991 Lucy Suchman initiated an annual 5-day workshop at the Oksnøen sum-
     mer camp for youths and schoolchildren south of Oslo called the Osknøen Symposi-
     um. Lucy brought with her her group of anthropologists from Xerox PARC and invited
     about 20 others to this event. I was very lucky to be invited in 1992 (for reasons that are
     hard to understand) and participated the next 5-6 years. This gave me the opportunity
     to meet and learn to know some absolutely brilliant scholars. In addition to Lucy, most
     notably was Susan Leigh Star, Geof Bowker and Marc Berg who was also doing research
     on standards and infrastructures. Of course, I learned a lot from discussing—also my
     own ideas—with these scholars for 5 days. But just as important, it boosted my interest
     in pursuing a research agenda related to standards and infrastructures.
         At this time (early—mid 1990s), I had no plans for obtaining an ordinary position
     at a university. However, in early 1996, Tone Bratteteig asked me if I was interested in
     a position in the IS group (called the systems work group at that time—systemarbeid
     in Norwegian) at the Department of Informatics which they would announce soon.
     That sounded like an interesting idea. But then I needed a PhD. With the support of
     Bo Dahlbom, I put together the relevant papers I had published (3 out of 4 together
     with Eric Monteiro), wrote a few more4, and submitted a thesis to the University of
     Gothenburg (the same day as the deadline for the position). I defended it in mid-De-
     cember 1996 with Giovan Francesco Lanzara as opponent and Claudio Ciborra and
     Kalle Lyytinen on the grading committee—leading to close and for me very fruitful
     collaboration with all three.
         I got the position and started at the University in April 1997. I continued doing
     infrastructure research together with friends and colleagues mentioned above as well as



https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       48      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                 8
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


    new ones. Most important was the collaboration with Claudio Ciborra until he unfor-
    tunately passed away all too early in February 2005. Through Claudio I also established
    broader contact and tighter relations with people at London School of Economics, in
    particular Jannis Kallinikos who I first meet in 2001 and established close relations
    to during my stay there in 2003-2004. Even though we have not published any joint
    papers, we have had frequent contacts and discussion about issues of shared interest
    from which I have learned a lot. At the University of Oslo, I have worked together with
    inspiring colleagues and PhD students I have supervised. Some in the latter group have
    stayed on at the university after their PhDs and become colleagues: Margunn Aanestad,
    Miria Grisot, Petter Nielsen and Egil Øvrelid. Margunn was the first PhD student I
    supervised from beginning to end—26 years of fruitful and stimulating collaboration at
    the University of Oslo. And I have also had a very close, long and fruitful collaboration
    with Bendik Bygstad for at least 15 years after we first met around 2005 when he was
    taking my course on information infrastructures as a PhD student (at the University of
    Agder) after he got tired of a 20-year career as IT manager and consultant.
        To summarize, my research career has been shaped by luck and accidents. I was cer-
    tainly lucky in finding a place to work which provided me a very fertile environment.
    NCC/NR, and the larger community it was a part of, was extremely heterogeneous in
    terms of interests and disciplinary background. NCC/NR, as an applied research cen-
    tre, was not defined by belonging to a specific discipline. So, there was no constrains
    on reading and thinking outside the box—actually, there was no box! Lack of structure
    may be a double-edged sword of course. It stimulates creativity, but one may also just
    get confused and lost. For me, the positive clearly outweighed the negative.
        Further, the software development projects I worked on were without doubt a most
    valuable resource. And it was indeed lucky for me that I was engaged on the ODA pro-
    ject and by the software company. I think the projects, in particular the ODA projects,
    was the factor that has shaped my career the most.
        Finally, the fact that NCC/NR lacked focus on and a culture for academic publish-
    ing was also an advantage for me. That meant that I did not work all night to reach a
    deadline for a conference, but rather spent afternoons and evenings on reading. I think
    that has been beneficial for me (even though Eric and I had to learn how to write a
    paper on our own when we started collaborating).


    5 The infrastructuring of computing
    Having examined the past, I will end this piece with a brief comment on the present
    and the future. In recent years, there has been a discussion about the unique charac-



Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 49
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure               9
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4


     teristics of the digital realm and how digital innovation differs from other innovation
     processes. One important characteristic that in my view has been overlooked in this
     discussion is the essential infrastructural nature of the digital. Theoretically, one could
     argue that this stems from the generative nature of the digital technology. Additionally,
     data itself is inherently infrastructural, as evidenced by the fact that integration, or data
     sharing, has always been considered the holy grail of IS.
         But we need to go beyond the theoretical. Just as Marxists distinguish between the
     idea of capitalism and what they call “the real existing capitalism,” we also need to dis-
     tinguish between the properties of digital material as such and the “real existing digital
     material.” The “real existing digital material” has become increasingly infrastructural
     throughout its history. Looking at the computer first. In the beginning, one computer
     could run only one application at the time. Then virtualization technology started to
     evolve, enabling a single computer to appear as multiple machines. This allowed it to
     run several applications simultaneously and serve a larger number of users in parallel,
     effectively becoming a shared physical infrastructure for these users. Todays’ virtualiza-
     tion technology, i.e., cloud computing, integrates hundreds of thousands of computers
     within a data centre, making them operate as if they were a single machine. In 2022,
     Google had approximately 2,5 million computers integrated, operating as a computing
     infrastructure for millions, if not billions, of users. So, while we often may think of
     our laptop as our primary computer, it is only a thin layer ¾the ‘icing on the cake’¾
     on top the global infrastructure where the applications or services we use are running.
     The infrastructural character of computing is also illustrated by the European Gaia-X
     initiative, which aims to facilitate the establishment of ‘sovereign data centres’.
         Research on information (or digital) infrastructures has focused on the growing
     number of information systems in use in organizations and their increasingly tighter
     integration within and across organizational boundaries. This growth in the number
     and degree of integration of information systems is clearly an ongoing trend, resulting
     in increasingly complex infrastructures that are shared among a continually expanding
     user base. While more complex infrastructures will have many features in common with
     existing ones, they will also develop new characteristics that require further research.
     Here, I will highlight a few examples, focusing on how the scope of these infrastructures
     is expanding.
         Healthcare has been an important domain for me, as well as for infrastructure re-
     search more broadly. This domain exemplifies the importance and challenges of in-
     formation sharing. It also illustrates the growing complexity of the domain, driven by
     new technologies that generate more information and by increased specialization and
     organizational diversity. These factors necessitate information sharing among a larger



https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       50      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                   10
                       © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                 Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


    number of actors. The complexity of infrastructures will continue to grow with the
    introduction of sensors, specialized solutions for monitoring and communicating with
    patients at home, AI and ML. A general trend, evident in healthcare and other sectors,
    is the integration of infrastructures across increasingly larger geographical and sectoral
    spaces. This is exemplified by EU’s European Health Data Space Health Union (called
    EU4Health) initiatives.
        Another domain in the public sector is the European level, for instance, through
    EU’s Pan-European eGovernment Infrastructures initiative. One example is the es-
    tablishment of EU-LISA in 2011—the “European Union Agency for the Operational
    Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice.”
    Eu-LISA develops and operates several platforms supporting the control and manage-
    ment of immigration and asylum seekers within the Schengen are including the Schen-
    gen Information System (SIS), Eurodac (asylum seekers’ fingerprints), SIS and VIS sys-
    tems, as well as systems currently under development, such as ECRIS-TCN, EES and
    ETIAS. While each of these systems represent complex infrastructures in themselves,
    their integration with each other as well as systems used by police and immigration au-
    thorities in the member states constitutes an infrastructure of considerable complexity.
        Similar developments are occurring in the private sector, as illustrated by the bank-
    ing sector. Banks started adopting IT solutions to manage their accounts and customers
    in the 1960s. Today, large banks have several thousand different solutions, integrated in
    various ways. In a cash-based economy, we interact with banks only directly to deposit
    and withdraw cash. Today, however, our interaction with banks primarily involves in-
    terbank payment services, such as paying bills, shopping in stores and restaurants, and
    making on-line purchases. In Norway, the implementation of these services started in
    1972 when banks established a new organization, BBS (The Banks Payment Central).
    BBS developed a solution for interbank payments that banks could integrate with their
    back-office systems, one year before SWIFT was established to develop a solution for
    international interbank transfers. The first SWIFT-based money transfer took place in
    1977. One core element in the payment service was a clearing system called NICS. In
    parallel, the national bank, Norges Bank, developed a settlement system, NBO.
        In the BBS’ development of the interbank payment solution, several additional ser-
    vices were introduced. These included ATMs connected to a network allowing any
    bank customer to withdraw cash from any bank’s ATM, BankAxept for card payments
    in shops and restaurants, which later expanded with BankAccess for card payments on
    on-line shopping platforms, an e-invoicing solution, BankID (a common identification
    and authentication service), and a solution for instant interbank payments. These ser-
    vices were developed and operated by a handful of organizations, all collectively owned



Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 51
                                                        Hanseth:
                                                        My Road to Infrastructure                11
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4


     by the Norwegian banks. In addition, the largest Norwegian bank, DNB, developed a
     peer-to-peer payment service for mobiles called Vipps. Other banks also started plan-
     ning similar services. However, these banks soon realized they could not compete with
     Vipps, which had already achieved substantial adoption. DNB, fearing competition
     from Apple and Google, offered to turn Vipps into an independent company collec-
     tively owned by all the banks, similar to other service providers. This transition was
     successfully implemented.
         This illustrates that the variety of payment services and the banks’ back-office sys-
     tems together constitute a vast and complex information infrastructure, which has con-
     tinuously evolved and grown over the years, accompanied by the virtual disappearance
     of cash and an explosion in electronic transaction. More recently, however, a new trend
     has emerged. In 2010, BBS merged with its Danish sister organization, PBS, estab-
     lishing Nets, collectively owned by Danish and Norwegian banks. In 2014, the banks
     sold Nets to a consortium consisting of the three equity funds Advent International,
     ATP og Bain Capital. In 2021, the clearing platform NICS were sold to Mastercard
     while the rest merged with the Italian based payment service company Nexi which is
     providing payment service in many European countries. The same year Vipps merged
     with the Danish MobiPay company (where the Norwegian banks own about 72% and
     the Danish DanskeBank the rest. Vipps and MobiPay also wanted to merge with the
     Finnish service but was denied doing so by EU. The Norwegian national bank, is also
     considering replacing the NGO settlement platform with the Eurozone’s TARGET2
     which is developed and operated in a collaboration by The Banque de France, Deutsche
     Bundesbank and Banca d’Italia—known as the 3CB
         These examples aim to illustrate the ever-growing complexity and expanding scope
     of information infrastructures in both public and private sectors. However, they also
     highlight several significant trends. The evolving infrastructures are not just about add-
     ing more solutions and connections; we observe that key components of the infrastruc-
     tures are emerging as platforms and institutions that mediate between traditional en-
     tities like banks or national immigration authorities. These institutions and platforms,
     such as BBS, BankID, BankAxept, and Nexi, are increasing in number and becoming
     more independent over time. This trend is exemplified by the evolution of BBS, orig-
     inally owned by Norwegian banks, which became part of Nets, and subsequently part
     of Nexi and Mastercard. Additionally, the technological and institutional complexity is
     compounded by the fact that all mentioned platforms, as well as the internal systems
     of banks and other private companies and public agencies, operate in independent data
     centres and communicate via services provided by independent network providers.




https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       52      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                12
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                                  Hanseth: My road to Infrastructure


        The infrastructures discussed here represent important examples of digital inno-
    vation, contributing to digitalization and digital transformation. In my view, banks
    have been radically transformed over the years. In a cash-based economy, banks op-
    erated as almost entirely independent organizations. However, with the digitalization
    of payments, banks have become part of an industry that provides payment services
    collectively. Further, the bank industry now includes numerous non-bank institutions
    responsible for core banking (payment) services which all banks depend on. This means
    that this industry can only undergo digital transformation as a whole. This trend is ev-
    ident in most industries. Thus, one overall one key issue for future research is the tight
    coupling between the evolution and transformation of industry-wide infrastructures
    and the digital transformation of an industry as a whole.
        In conclusion, I have attempted to argue that information technology—“the real ex-
    isting”—is continuously becoming more infrastructural, making infrastructure research
    more important than ever before.


    Notes
     1.   This also includes my passion for wine—he gave his first “lesson” in 1992 when he guided
          us through Chas.E’s wine cellar in Aarhus followed by a wine tasting in the evening and
          many more wine tastings over the years at his home.
     2.   Most of Kristen’s discussion partners were non-Norwegians, many of them Americans,
          causing his telephone bills to create major concern for his employers (Norwegian Comput-
          ing Center (NCC or, in Norwegian, NR) until 1984, University of Oslo from then on).
     3.   The manuscript was published in a substantially revised version with the title “Dialogue
          and development—”Theory of communication, action research and the restructuring of
          working.”
     4.   One of them with the title “Information Infrastructure Development: Cultivating the In-
          stalled Base” was published with Kalle Lyytinen as co-author in 2010, with the title “De-
          sign theory for information infrastructures: The case of building the Internet.”




Published by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 53
                                                         Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure                    13
                        © Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2024 36(1), 41-54

                Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 36 [], Iss. 1, Art. 4




https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol36/iss1/4       54      Hanseth:
                                                         My Road to Infrastructure         14
