Participatory Design that Matters—Facing the Big Issues

SUSANNE BØDKER, Aarhus University
MORTEN KYNG, Aarhus University and Alexandra Instituttet

At a time where computer technology is putting human lives and work under pressure, we discuss how to
provide alternatives. We look back at Participatory Design (PD) which was originally about possibilities and
alternatives as much as it was about specific solutions. The paper aims to revitalize and revise PD to help
people influence big issues. The agenda for this is set through proposing a set of key elements for realizing
new, important possibilities. We discuss the possible changes of partnership with users, call for a new role
of researchers as activists, debate how to work with demanding visions for lasting impact, and democratic
control. We focus on high technological ambitions, on deployment of working prototypes, on alliances, and on
scaling up, all seen as important for a PD that matters. We conclude the paper with an invitation to participate
in the continued discussion, codesign, and realization of a PD that matters.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Participatory design, alternatives
ACM Reference format:
Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng. 2018. Participatory Design that Matters—Facing the Big Issues. ACM Trans.                         4
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 25, 1, Article 4 (February 2018), 31 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3152421


1   INTRODUCTION
We are currently entering an era where the life conditions of many people are deteriorating, and
corporate interests penetrate life at large, while political parties and institutions seem unable or
unwilling to take action. Facebook, Uber, and Mechanical Turk, as well as their underlying data
collection, are examples of such technology-based phenomena that are causing a variety of chal-
lenges to our lives and organizations. We are not convinced that human-computer interaction
(HCI) at large and Participatory Design (PD), in particular, are able to embrace these challenges,
and accordingly, we aim to revitalize participation so as to innovate PD, in a manner where PD may
again help people influence big issues. By big issues we mean for people, in various communities
and practices, to take control and partake in the shaping and delivery of technological solutions,
processes of use, and future developments that matter to them and their peers. Our concern is that



The authors thank our colleagues from the Fablab@school.dk and 4S. The organizers of the PDC 2016 conference in Aarhus,
who got us started on the discussions leading to this paper, many PITsters who we have discussed and debated with, and
the anonymous reviewers who gave us feedback. The work was sponsored by the Aarhus University Interdisciplinary
Research Center, PIT.
Authors’ addresses: S. Bødker and M. Kyng, Department of Computer Science and Center for Participatory IT, Aarhus
University, Aabogade 34, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark; email: {bodker, mkyng}@cs.au.dk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2018 ACM 1073-0516/2018/02-ART4 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3152421


            ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:2                                                                                           S. Bødker and M. Kyng

user gains [20], [21] are not only better processes for the direct participants but more importantly,
solutions that are controlled by the future users.
   PD was one of the early contributions of Scandinavian research to HCI [8]. It emerged in a
period where computers were beginning to change what was going on at the workplace. It was
developed as a tool to help workers and their unions influence the changes brought about when
management introduced computers on the shop floor. Accordingly, it was also concerned with
strengthening the weak part when conflicts loomed. At the time, PD was about future possibilities
and alternatives as much as it was about specific solutions to specific problems. Today PD has a
role in all of the World and encompasses a broad spectrum of perspectives, as illustrated by e.g.,
the growing body of HCI4D1 activities, see also the Health Information Systems Program (HISP),
presented in Section 4. However, the focus of most present-day PD is on how to facilitate direct
collaboration between users and designers in codesign processes to engage with everyday issues
of use, through technology or otherwise (see also [43], [4]). This role has been adapted by HCI at
large, leading to what we see as a focus on small issues (in contrast to big and important ones) such
as products and technological solutions that the users like, rather than on solutions that profoundly
change their activities as well as the goals they are supported in pursuing. And the motivation for
involving users is very much in the hands of research. As Bossen et al. [21, p. 31] stated: In most
approaches, users are involved in order to tap into their ideas and knowledge. User involvement is a
one-way process: Requirements are elicited from, usability tested upon, and systems are delivered to
users.
   Bossen et al. [21] pointed out that while a two-way process, long-term engagement and maximal
effort on behalf of both researchers and users are important for a process of mutual gain, it is not
necessarily sufficient. Furthermore, participation in specific projects is often not viewed as positive
by the involved users/workers, because they get too much of it while they also get too little out of
the effort. Rather it is seen as a tiresome addition to the tasks already to be carried out, an addition
with no relation to goals that are important to the users (see, e.g., [63] or [30]).
   We aim to revitalize participation by changing PD so that it may again become a tool to help
people influence important matters in their lives. We want HCI at large, and PD in particular, to
play a role in people’s sustainable income and livelihood rather than as a part of the Competi-
tion State [27], [64] with its focus on competitiveness of organizations acting on global markets.
The Network of European and North American labor unions and worker organizations calls for
transnational multi-stakeholder cooperation to ensure fair working conditions in digital labor plat-
forms2 and recently ended the report of the status of work today as follows:
          We close this document with a brief reflection on the founding principle of the
          International Labor Organization: “Labor is not a commodity.” This is a philo-
          sophical principle that asserts the fundamental and universal dignity of human
          beings, regardless of the indifference with which they may be treated in any given
          social, political, or economic context. This principle has clear implications for
          policy, including centrally the protection of the right of workers to organize. This
          principle – and its policy implications – is just as crucial to a decent society in
          the “information age” as it was in the industrial era. We believe that information
          technology, shaped wisely, holds great promise for expanding access to good work.

1 Originally, HCI4D was an abbreviation of “HCI for Development,” see e.g., [28]. More recently, HCI4D is described as

concerning the role of technology in diverse domains such as, but not limited to conflict zones; literacy; infant mortality;
rural and urban community development; and marginalized populations in both developing countries and industrialized
nations, see https://chi2014.acm.org/spotlights/hci4d.
2 http://crowdwork-igmetall.de/, accessed January 5, 2017.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                               4:3

   The big issues we address are, hence, connected to wisely shaping IT for a decent society. In
the current paper, we explore possible roles of technology and design processes in this shift, and
discuss processes which recognize that conflicts and tensions are important when different groups
of people exercise influence.
   As part of this, we are aiming to support processes where users and researchers partner up
to develop long-term visions for technology, skills, and redistribution of power and resources. In
doing so, we also recognize that the partners we work with must play a major role in developing
the visions, that we as researchers are siding with the partners in relation to the redistribution of
power and resources and, hence, that important parts of this kind of development is political, and
will entail disagreement as well as conflict regarding both means and ends. While we choose the
term partners here, we will later, in Sections 5.2 and 5.3, discuss how our proposal changes the
roles of what we know as users and researcher. To develop this kind of processes, we need a lot of
concrete experience, and this means engaging in action research-like initiatives addressing how
to increase the influence of groups of people in areas that are important to them, e.g., of pupils,
parents, and teachers on how schools are organized, including how we learn and how computers
are used. And even more importantly, we have to engage in initiatives where the partners we
work with are among the primary drivers and where they take on this role because they expect
the initiatives to create major, lasting changes in areas that are important to them.
   In order to contribute to major, lasting changes, such development processes may also have
to engage in development of structures underpinning the specific initiative e.g., by supporting
our partners in exercising influence and sustaining the changes achieved (see also [10], [53], and
[54]). The structure of the paper is as follows: First, we look back on the history of early PD or
cooperative design. We move on to address the current situation, first by discussing what has been
lost and found in current research, and second by presenting three projects that give us hope for a
future PD that matters and embrace the big issues that we propose should have an explicit focus if
PD research is to be revitalized. We then discuss these issues by means of a set of key elements for
realizing new, important possibilities. We conclude the paper by briefly discussing how to move
on, addressing issues, perspectives, and research, we would like to understand better. We end with
an invitation to cooperate on PD that matters, emphasizing why this is important and difficult.

2   HISTORY
In many ways, PD, or cooperative design, was an early, strong Scandinavian contribution to the
field of HCI. Parts of this history have been told many times, most often with a focus on tools and
techniques, such as the role of prototypes or various forms of workshops. Cooperative design in the
Scandinavian tradition began in the early 1970s when technology as well as education regarding
technology were very different from what is discussed in many later projects. In the following,
we will look back at history, not to recapitulate it systematically, but to reinterpret some of the
history to reorient the PD discussion away from tools and techniques. We look at the many parts
of the original work that are not about PD tools and techniques, but rather about the partnerships
and politics considered in the Scandinavian tradition.

2.1 NJMF, Demos, and DUE
The first generation of projects included the NJMF (1971–73) [62], Demos (1975–79) [38], [37], and
DUE (1977–80) [55]. They were situated in each their Scandinavian country, and did research on

    • the impact of computer use at workplaces,
    • the formulation of demands on computer-based systems in organizations,

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:4                                                                                      S. Bødker and M. Kyng

      • the formulation of agreements between employers and unions, regulating the introduction
        and use of technology at the workplaces,
      • the need for knowledge, teaching material, and courses among workers and union members,
      • new frameworks for worker influence, by addressing worker controlled resources, as well
        as new models of negotiations.

   The projects developed with different emphasis, but an important part of all of them, as seen
from the point of view of the researchers, was cooperation with the local trade unions so as to
focus also on what it meant to deploy computers at work. To illustrate how the projects addressed
more than tools and techniques for PD, the following examples from one of the factories in the
Norwegian NJMF project show a profound concern for the technological possibilities and limita-
tions:

      — A new production planning system was shown to have been constructed in such a way that
        it would inevitably lead to more overtime work.
      — In addition, the production planning system had shop-floor terminals that only allowed data
        entry, i.e., it was not possible for the workers to get, e.g., status information at the shop floor
        (a discussion that has parallels in much later analyses of production planning systems (see,
        e.g., [22])).
      — It was problematized that Computer Numerically Controlled Machines were introduced that
        did not allow for shop floor programming, hence preventing flexibility and control at the
        shop floor (see [61], [35, p. 29]).

   Largely, these first projects pointed to computers as managerial instruments of increased con-
trol, as well as to the need for training and education for workers on the shop floor. The focus
was on local action and negotiations based on central support in terms of teaching materials and
support for negotiations.

2.2    Utopia
Among researchers who participated in these early projects, there was a rising concern for
the possibilities of offering technological alternatives. In the poetic style of Pelle Ehn [33]: fo-
cusing on democracy—and worker participation—actively searching—alternative futures—through
collaborative—design things—at the time when computers—entered the shop floor—threatening to
deskill workers—and tighten managerial control. These concerns were seeding the Utopia project
(1981–84) [11], [13], [12], [33]. In collaboration with central labor unions, researchers went on to
target new technology for newspaper production and cooperate on its commercialization in or-
der to make new, alternative types of systems available for newspapers. The idea was to expand
local choice through centrally developed alternatives. Specifically, researchers set out to address
systems that support (e.g., [35, p. 32])

      — quality of work and products,
      — democracy at work, and
      — education for local development.

  The emerging design of possible alternatives involved envisioning, then, bleeding edge tech-
nologies, such as inexpensive desktop laser printers, and a WYSIWYG newspaper production sys-
tem. It is important to remind ourselves that this was before laser printers moved out of Xerox’
research labs, and WYSIWYG became commonly known to people with the introduction of the
Apple Macintosh (both ca. 1984).

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                4:5

   In order to codesign together with graphical workers, the researchers developed a new design
method together with new techniques and tools. And the project collaborated with a commercial
company that intended to build and market the technological solution. In the end, however, the
cooperation with this company failed, and Wikipedia quite adequately describes what the Utopia
project is remembered for: In the Utopia project, the major achievements were the experience-based
design methods, developed through the focus on hands-on experiences, emphasizing the need for tech-
nical and organizational alternatives.3
   While these methods became influential in the wider HCI community, the methods as such say
little about what the users would gain from participating in the design processes (see also [21]).

2.3 The Results of the Early Projects in Summary
Over the years, several authors have looked back at these passed projects and discussed their im-
portance for current challenges (e.g., [17], [46], [44]). In a recent paper, Bratteteig and Wagner [24]
analyzed a number of their past PD projects from the 1980s onwards. They discuss how participa-
tion in PD projects must necessarily be seen in connection with decision-making and the power
of the users to act. The platform for users to act, in the early projects, were organized in coopera-
tion with trade unions, and the unions played a major part, both in decision-making through the
practical work and on the steering committees, paving the way for users.
   In addition, the original research focus embraced workplace democracy and worker influence
on technology, and the results of design, more than the design processes as such, were seen as
important steps toward workplace democracy. In a certain way, both the actual move from expert
researchers toward an active collaboration with the users, starting in the NJMF, and the methods,
resulting not least from Utopia, were rather coincidential. In this sense, the projects were action
research projects with an agenda of strengthening workplace democracy and worker influence
on technology that developed into PD projects in order to achieve project goals. The work on PD
methods, tools, techniques, and theory definitely improved the results of the design work, at the
same time as PD was not explicitly on the agenda from the outset. In summary, we may say that
the first Scandinavian PD projects had a vision of contributing to a more democratic society. They
based this on cooperation with a strong partner, the trade unions.
   To promote this vision together with the unions, the projects worked on
     — strategies for influencing the use of IT in the workplaces, and improve quality of worklife,
     — new technological solutions and new ways of working, as a strategic way to expand local
       choice available to the trade unions locally, and
     — new tools and techniques for design.
   As it turned out, the work on tools and techniques for codesign lived on, and was developed
further in the PD tradition. In contrast, the idea of promoting visions of democracy together with
strong partners was largely forgotten as was the development of strategies that would allow these
partners to influence technologies at work based on their own interests and goals.
   PD was born at a time when computers were introduced at the workplaces as a managerial
control instrument, thus severely challenging worker influence at the shop floor [62], [37], [77].
It was developed further, and was embraced by HCI research, when computer systems began to
substitute traditional craft tools at the shop floor [11], [35]. However, as the trade unions became
weaker, the trade union quest for industrial democracy grinded to a halt and the political aspect
of PD, with an explicit focus on the interests of labor, gradually faded [51].

3 Same.



          ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:6                                                                                      S. Bødker and M. Kyng

   At the same time, computers became commonplace, and although the results from the first
and second generation of Scandinavian PD projects supported continued knowledge build-up
in the unions, the failure of the Utopia project to initiate the development, and deployment of a
viable alternative to the commercial main stream solutions meant that local choices continued to
be very limited [13]. In short, dealing with computer issues was reduced to “business as usual,”
and computer issues were handled by the unions like wages, working hours, and so on without
much attention to actual alternatives (see also [51]). An important exception from this was the
work by the Swedish TCO union to certify computer screens. The TCO label offered a useful
alternative that became so ubiquitous that the link to the strategic work of the union was often
forgotten.4

3 QUESTIONING THE STATE-OF-THE-ART OF CURRENT RESEARCH
What we originally knew as cooperative design was inspired by many theoretical traditions, and
Marxist theories played an important role in the early Scandinavian projects [35]. Voss et al. [74]
summarized the common grounds of the many different kinds of current user–designer collabo-
ration, across approaches, as follows:
    Work and technology are situated and socially organized; design must be grounded in an un-
derstanding of this context; participation of users is generally beneficial for design; users have
relevant knowledge and skill; skills change when technology is introduced; technology should
support work practices, and support quality, not only quantity; and last, design processes are po-
litical and have a potential for conflict.
    At some level, we are certain that most PD researchers would subscribe to this core, yet it seems
that for many, the focus is entirely on the actual collaboration in design between designers and
relevant stakeholders, including users. We note that in many projects the idea that processes are
political and have a potential for (profound) conflict seems to be non-consequential. As an example
of this, Pedersen [63], in analyzing a project where users lose interest in participating, focuses on
how design is managing and setting up design processes, what he calls design before design. An
alternative or supplementary explanation may have focused on the lack of projects goals that were
really important for the users.
    In the following, we dissect current PD in order to discuss how, from a research perspective, we
can move beyond this current state-of-the-art and the challenges this gives to the development of
PD. The first issue, we look at, is the focus on the here-and-now without considering what happens
after a project. Then we discuss the low technological ambitions that we find permeate current
projects and hampers the potentials for substantial, long-term benefits for the participating users
and the groups they represent. The third issue we discuss is the do-gooding element, which often
seems to steer projects away from conflicts. Finally, we consider how politics is often reduced
to ethics, i.e., reduced to questions of how a researcher should behave when involving users in
design.

3.1    The Here-and-Now
We are critical of current literature in (and around) PD which seems to focus on how researchers set
up here-and-now cocreation and collaboration with groups of people for a here-and-now purpose
(e.g., making) without much perspective on the future (or for that matter for the past). This is
analyzed (by [45] as well as [52]) as processes with little concern for sustaining relationships and
networks after the project. In contrast, bottom-up, ad-hoc here-and-now activities dominate. Kyng
[52] pointed to the difference between the early PD projects where learning and empowering were

4 http://tcocertified.com/tco_certified_story/.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                               4:7

important outcomes and more recent ones where the design process as such and its methods seem
most important as outcome. Balka [1] discussed and supported this position by discussing how the
PD community has focused on processes of participation and forgotten about project outcomes,
i.e., the impact that the efforts of participatory design practitioners and participants have on either
technology design or work practices and workplace democracy [1, p. 78]. Whittle [75, p. 121] used
Balka’s work to conclude that: The charge to the PD community is that participation has become
‘a goal in itself’ and has led to an obsession with methodologies for engendering participation and
a willingness to see success in terms of ‘feel good processes’ rather than any long-term, sustained
outcome.
   Halskov and Brodersen Hansen [40] supported this claim when they summarized their studies
of research papers in PD pointing out that PD does not address the product of the design process
as much as it focuses on specific domain experiences for the involved participants. They pointed to
the number of papers that are about specific methods or PD activities, some of which are in new
domains. As sympathetic and well-meaning as these projects may be, they are focused on local
learning without concern for scale and reach of this learning. Halskov and Brodersen Hansen [40]
questioned whether the results of well-intended participation as such improve quality of life, de-
spite the merits of supporting, e.g., the wellbeing and changed mindset of participants. In addition,
Halskov and Brodersen Hansen [40] discussed the summary of [68] and concluded that in many
PD projects, there seem to be no development of action possibilities, and so on, that point ahead
for participants. The projects analyzed became strangely non-committal with no long-term per-
spectives, for the groups that the user came from, or for that matter, for the researchers, designers
or other possible stakeholders.
   With this direct here-and-now focus on a specific collaboration, these projects have become
more process than outcome. They are about doing something for and with the people directly
involved in the processes, whether or not this leads to a technological solution that will sustain
beyond the actual process. In our view, this leads to too many processes and products, with no
utility and no impact.

3.2 Low Technological Ambitions
With our background in computing, we find it surprising how current PD research can be about
anything, including processes without a technological focus at all. We seem to have lost the
anchoring of PD in IT projects (see also [50]). As a matter of fact, many current projects seem
to focus on maker technologies (e.g., [6]) which may, or may not have much connection to IT as
such: Neither 3D-printing nor singular Arduino boards, in our perspective, address the potential
development of software under the control of users. In addition, these projects rarely question
the tools available and there seems to be no real concern for the long-term learning of users
regarding digital thinking and digital/software possibilities in a democratic perspective with
a few exceptions such as [48]. This is problematic because it results in a lack of influence on
our common technological future. Korsgaard et al. [50] discussed why this has happened and
suggested a number of reasons: publications from early work emphasized processes and methods
(e.g., [14], [36]) (see also Section 2.3) and resonated with contemporary movements in related
areas (e.g., [2], [39]). PD provided a space for increasingly multi-disciplinary research and less
technical disciplines were hence offered an opening to contribute and investigate the impact of
technology.
   Technology again is not one-off products, even if they can be printed in 3D. Technology encom-
passes solutions embedded in other solutions and infrastructures, use and design, appropriation
and change as it happens over time. For these reasons, we are also concerned with the long- and
short-term perspectives of the technologies, be they in relation to the appropriation to specific

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:8                                                                                      S. Bødker and M. Kyng

local uses or the infrastructuring with other technologies (see [58]). We lack a concern for the
fact that no technology design projects start from scratch today (see also [10]) and we are largely
missing concerns for the long-term perspectives (of both technologies and the skill development
of people). Makerspace researchers and practitioners have begun to discuss sustainability issues,
in terms of how their making may—or may not—contribute to a more sustainable future. see e.g.,
[69]. This paper discusses sustainability in terms of the so-called Brundtland report from the World
Commission on Environment and Development from 1987, and as of yet this type of sustainability
does not seem to embrace long-term learning and design, as discussed by Iversen and Dindler [45].
   Meanwhile, we see technologies appearing that more than ever challenge democracy and PD,
both on a shorter and a longer time-scale. In our view, the centralization of (the major commercial
platforms on) the Internet, big data, and large-scale infrastructuring challenge the core democratic
ideals of PD. And this is to a degree where sharing economy, crowdfunding, and participatory
cultures are not explored in terms of their democratic potentials as much as they are simply put
to the service of a sharing or platform economy dominated by Uber and Airbnb, as well as direct
brokers of work such as Fiverr. Hence, many of these platforms are mainly about commercial
interests of the few, based on the “participation” of the many (see also [67]), and it is concerning
why no PD research seems to profoundly question and challenge these technological uses.
   Hence, we lack projects that have a high technological ambition even if the technical solutions
may not be immediately accessible to a universal set of users. As Carroll et al. [26] pointed out, the
technological ambition in particular projects may not simply be for all, here and now. Or as they
stated: There may always be emerging technologies within the grasp of a few and beyond the grasp of
many others. We need to do PD research that spearheads and challenges technologies, even if these
technologies never become mainstream (see also discussion in [25] and [18]). This emphasizes the
need to go beyond the here-and-now and consider technological alternatives in PD as much as
mainstream solutions, not in order to go back to a “technology first” design approach, but because
most ambitious PD work, including work on social communities, requires ambitious IT design as
well (see also, e.g., [19].

3.3 Do-Gooding
Third, there is a strong do-gooding element in the current state of PD research [9], [10], [75].
Bødker [9] pointed out that in the 1990s, in particular, PD became something good in itself, no
matter with whom researchers and designers collaborated. This development was questioned by
[52], [78], [7].
   Many current projects seem to be working with agreeable or politically good communities,
rather than concerning themselves with conflicts and tensions in and around groups of users.
There is, accordingly, a focus on cocreation, more than on PD that also exposes difference and
profound conflict. Björgvinsson et al. [6] talked about transforming antagonism into agonism, and
conflict between enemies to constructive controversies among adversaries who have opposing
matters of concern but also accept other views as legitimate. However, we do not see this as an
obvious path forward when it comes to redistribution of power and resources, in addition to
which we see several examples of participation being discussed in the context of art, which, as
pointed out by Carroll in the panel discussed in [79] has led to the term participation being used
in too many ways in HCI, e.g., as cocreation with the purpose of some form of artistic expression.
Does this kind of cocreation, e.g., initiated for the benefit of some form of art, have any impact on
how people use and develop technologies in the longer term and wider perspective? Does it help
people ask questions or just find comfort? We doubt that the former is the case, and we view this
diversification mainly as a diversion from impacting technology, how technology is developed
and how it is used.

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                4:9

3.4 Politics Reduced to Ethics
The politics of design was an important concern in the early projects and e.g., Ehn and Kyng [34],
[35] and Kensing and Blomberg [49] addressed the introduction of computer-based systems and
power dynamics that emerge within the workspace. Fundamentally, unions and workers were seen
as threatened in their involvement in production and their ownership over their work situation,
leading to PD projects such as Utopia that specifically teamed up with this “weaker” side. [35]
and [49] addressed the introduction of computer-based systems and power dynamics that emerge
within the workspace. Fundamentally, unions and workers were seen as threatened in their in-
volvement in production and their ownership over their work situation, leading to PD projects
such as Utopia that specifically teamed up with this “weaker” side.
   Pedersen [63, p.172], discussing codesign, in particular, recognizes the role of politics as part
of codesign: Codesign’s emphasis on design as political is an important corrective to more common
understandings of design as primarily about function and aesthetics (...). Codesign, in other words,
is a welcome challenge to an overly individualistic conception of design practice and an uncritical
view of design’s role in society. At the same time, he is very critical of the assumption that this
recognition is sufficient as political stance in design: However, (...) I want, in this paper, to question
the implicit, if not explicit, assumptions that codesign necessarily is in the interest of the people
and organisations it is ‘for’, despite codesign’s declared intentions and that we can rely on an
interest among participants to be directly involved in design activities over a sustained period of
time.
   In our view, there are several critical questions to be derived from this: Are practices of design
facilitating development of relevant forms of empowerment, e.g., decision making, among the in-
volved people? Are they supporting the involved people in representing and promoting group
interests? And is a specific project addressing a really important concern?
   In recent years, e.g., Mouffe’s notion of agonism [60] has inspired many HCI/PD researchers,
such as Björgvinsson et al. [6], and DiSalvo [32]. Agonism addresses conflict and difference rather
than consensus, yet in PD projects it also shifts the focus away from the more classical notion
of profound conflicts between the haves and the have nots to design processes that allow for
difference and conflict, without designers/researchers taking side in this [40]. One reason for this
is probably that it reduces politics to something, which is acceptable in a company or pluralistic
community context.
   We find the issues of how researchers should behave, ethical issues, important. At the same
time, we find it problematic that politics has been reduced to how researchers should behave and
act fairly when involving users in projects. We would argue that politics is more than fairness and
ethics, and we hypothesize that the tendency to avoid profound conflicts also makes it difficult for
current PD to engage in some of the more controversial areas where researchers could really help
people by taking side with them.
   Based on the analyses of [40] and [4], it seems that political stance, conflicts, and societal
analyses have lost way to more generic political process thinking, where design processes are
recognized as political (dealing with multiple, different opinions, and standpoints), but the design
results and their use are not considered in a political context of potential conflict. Thus, there
seems to be little focus on underlying contradictions, causing differences in standpoints, or on
consequences of designers/researchers siding with one or some of the involved parties. This
means that the methodological focus on e.g., working with prototypes for the sake of giving
(direct) users a voice has increased, but the user’s voice is not placed in a context of potential
conflict. In addition, the increased focus on that designers’ need to learn from users, is not
considered in a context of mutual learning where the users also learn e.g., about how to promote


          ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:10                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

group interest. Finally, we note that more general understandings of quality of work has given
way to specific users’ needs, as can be seen across the entire field of HCI.
  With the current move of PD toward ethics and agonism, we sincerely lack a notion of partner-
ship in conflict or a concern for how researchers team up with partners to fight for shared political
goals in the interest of the partners. Or, vice versa, how may partners help PD researchers who
are accused of being political when they side with partners?

3.5    Summary
The issues we have with current PD add up to a focus on here-and-now situations that are in
many ways convenient to researchers; a lack of technological ambition on behalf of both users
and researchers, a choice of researchers to work with communities of users that are immediately
sympathetic and generally shying away from a political stance, especially when it entails conflict
with powerful adversaries. All of these issues have elements of a very short-term attention span
of the research toward the users and use domains, and a least-effort strategy for researchers with
respect to time spent, alliances, and partnerships, technological challenges and even convincing
the research community that the project is meaningful.
   In addition, current PD is refining design tools and techniques that support the involvement
of users, current, and future, in design processes. However, the questions of how design goals are
defined, and how decisions are made about what to implement, are outside the realm of this type of
PD. Strategies for the processes of design and for how and why the outcomes of design could and
should change the work activities of users are not developed together with these same users and the
organizations. Hence, when conflicts loom, workers may simply lose interest in participation [30],
[75]. Ironically, this is parallel to the understanding and critique of the socio-technical approach in
the 1970s, which led to the development of Scandinavian PD (For a short summary of the critique,
see, e.g., [35, 22ff.]).
   In the following section, we move on and present three cases that point in directions that are
different, and as we argue, more promising. We will also address their shortcomings as a way of
approaching the future of revitalized participation in design.

3.6 Inspiration for a New PD
First, we briefly describe three cases that have inspired our work on a new PD: HISP, The HISP5
[23], Fablab@school [10], [31], [45], [70], [71] and especially the telemedicine initiative centered
around 4S: The Foundation for Software-based Health Services6 [53], [54]. None of these are pre-
sented because they are perfect. Rather, we present them mainly to discuss and inspire a new PD,
even with the limitations they have. Then, in Sections 5 and 6, we present and discuss our proposed
new PD, by drawing on examples from the first and second generation of Scandinavian PD projects,
on current projects as well as the three cases described further below. In Section 7, we discuss how
to move on, addressing issues, perspectives, and research we would like to learn more about.

3.7    HISP: The Health Information Systems Program
HISP is a global network of people, entities, and organizations that design, implement, and sustain
Health Information Systems in support of decentralized and empowering structures.
   HISP began as an initiative in South Africa addressing two issues. First of all, to contribute
to the provision of useful health related data on all citizens, independent of race. Second, to help

5 HISP webpage: www.hisp.org, accessed January 19, 2017, HISP at UiO webpage: www.mn.uio.no/ifi/english/research/

networks/hisp/, accessed January 19, 2017.
6 4S webpage: 4S-online.dk, accessed January 19, 2017.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                4:11

build flexible local data processing capabilities to support not only the local collection and delivery
of centrally requested health data, but also to make it possible, locally, to evaluated the effect of
health initiatives in the community, e.g., regarding “Measles immunization coverage under one
year” [23].
   As a network, HISP globally follows a participatory and action research approach to support
local management of healthcare delivery and information flows in a growing number of devel-
oping countries. Hence, HISP addresses many concerns of HCI4D. HISP was established by the
Department of Informatics at the University of Oslo.
   HISP started as a Research and Development Pilot Project in three health districts in Cape Town,
South Africa, in 1994. Initially, focus was on Community Information Systems and grassroots
health committees, but after upsets caused by local elections in 1995, focus shifted to integration
processes and information systems within the Department of Health. The District Health Informa-
tion Software (DHIS), finished in early 1997, was adopted by the Western Cape Province in mid-97,
by the Eastern Cape Province in Oct. 1998, and finally, as a national system in February 1999 with
rollout completed during 1999 and 2000. The first web-based system was developed from 2005
to 2006. From late 2000, it was also piloted or adopted by other countries, including India, Cuba,
Botswana, Kenya, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Vietnam, and Zanzibar. Today, HISP South Africa
is organized as a not-for-profit NGO with more than 50 full-time staff. Activities include software
development, database management, health information systems support and training, as well as
short courses in health information. These courses have been attended by several hundred health
information officers and health staff involved in management.7
   HISP at the University of Oslo, Norway, is one of the leading members of the network and their
contribution includes in-country capacity building, research, a Ph.D. program, hosting the core
development of the DHIS software, and implementation support.8
   In recent years, multinational companies are aggressively promoting their own, alternative
software-based services, and to counteract this trend HISP is focusing more on developing local
capacity to master new technologies [23].
   HISP has been going on for 20+ years and has inspired us because it is an initiative with an
explicit democratic agenda with a focus on decentralization, an agenda it has developed and
grown over the years as an important resource in an ongoing democratic process that addresses
how to plan and use resources related to health and how to understand and evaluate outcomes.
We have been inspired, in particular, by the dual, continued focus on developing approaches
to data collection and use, in support of local action and on contributing to an ongoing partic-
ipatory process of standardization of data in order to support both local/local and local/central
cooperation, hence facilitating scaling up. At the same time, HISP has created a self-sustaining
organizational network which handles the technological core and the processes of continued
development, deployment, and use.

3.8 The Fablab@school.dk
The FabLab@school.dk project [10], [31], [45], [70], [71] was launched based on a 2014 reform
of standards in the Danish primary and lower secondary school. This educational reform empha-
sized the use of digital technology in all subject matters. A new program in crafts and design
replaced woodwork and needlecraft in order to support the digital competences. As a response to
this, FabLab@school.dk focused on digital fabrication and design thinking so as to develop an ed-
ucational environment to integrate new digital fabrication technologies and construction kits that

7 HISP webpage: www.hisp.org, accessed January 19, 2017.
8 HISP at UiO webpage: www.mn.uio.no/ifi/english/research/networks/hisp/, accessed January 19, 2017.



           ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:12                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

would help students and teachers work in designerly ways with real-world problems. Currently,
an estimate of 12,000 students and 1,160 teachers in 44 schools have been engaged in the project,
either by directly taking part, or by integrating elements of the project finding in their teaching.
During the first two years, 10 schools have established a digital fabrication laboratory on campus
in which students have access to digital fabrication tools and construction kits. Moreover, three
municipalities have established a central fabrication laboratory with equipment and staff (2–3 per
unit) to assist [10].
   Because of its embedding, politically and administratively in the Danish educational system,
FabLab@school.dk involved many different local and national stakeholders in a variety of diverse
project activities. According to Bødker et al. [10], the list of stakeholders differed significantly
from activity to activity. In some cases, school teachers and students were engaged as end-users
and in other activities, politicians, and officials. In addition, many other types of activities were
carried out to engage, e.g., the national and local political level. Some of these activities used PD
methods, while others consisted of presentations and survey reports. Bødker et al. [10] described
how the project worked to stimulate emerging new configurations of collaborators through
participatory activities where participants engaged in defining future infrastructures and in
sustaining the networks of people and technologies that embrace the design. They present many
multifaceted activities involving a broad range of authorities that all together were involved in
introducing digital fabrication technologies to the Danish school system. In Fablab@School.dk,
participatory processes played out in several political and practical arenas. The project involved
many, sometimes messy, activities before, between, and after, what we would normally call,
participatory workshops. The project is furthermore, according to [10], focused on how par-
ticipatory processes tie into existing networks across organizations and how initiatives in the
project become dispersed across these networks. In this way, the project reaches across six levels
of authority of the Danish educational system, and covers the many parents, students, teachers,
industry representatives, and policy makers that took part in PD activities throughout the
project.
   Most recently, the project has been involved with the development of a new national elective
course in primary schools. In [47, p. 27], the project researchers, Iversen, Smith, and Dindler, dis-
cuss how a commitment to political participatory design defines a new role for children in partici-
patory practices – the role of protagonist. The objective here transcends the goal of giving children a
voice in design, and addresses more broadly how children can be empowered to shape technological
development and critically reflect on the role of technology in their practices.
   We find FabLab@School interesting because it integrates maker and fablab technologies into
educational settings with an emphasis on engaging students and teachers so as to obtain long-
term perspectives on digital thinking, design, and democracy. It addresses the specific roles that
students as well as teachers may have in PD, and combines this with processes to engage the many
necessary political and organizational levels in a national school system.

3.9 The 4S: The Foundation for Software-based Health Services
The 4S9 Foundation for Software-based Health Services was set-up to govern open source
software for telemedicine in Denmark. The software is mainly developed in PD-inspired projects
funded by different public research and development grants. And this is reflected in the 4S
organization, which only have members from public organizations: a board of managers, mainly

9 As indicated by the headline, 4S is the short name for “The Foundation for Software-based Health Services.” 4S is an

acronym for the original Danish name of the foundation: “Stiftelsen for Software-baserede SundhedsServices.” The Foun-
dation has no connection to the Society for Social Studies of Science, which is also known as “4S.”

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                              4:13

from public health, a software group with software architects also mainly from public health, and
finally health forums with public health personnel and, to a smaller degree, patient organizations,
and a few PD researchers.
   In Denmark, health and care are financed by tax payers. Five regions administer the public
hospitals and 98 municipalities are in charge of prevention, elder care, and rehabilitation. When
evaluating technology for telehealth (including telemedicine and telecare), the major public health
providers found that either system quality was too low or the price was too high. In order to
change this situation, government, regions, and municipalities agreed on a reference architecture
for a national telehealth infrastructure. In addition, five large-scale demonstration projects were
initiated. Two of these were to develop a common open source telehealth system called OpenTele.
At the same time, a national research project developed an open source infrastructure toolbox
compliant with the reference architecture and some of the researchers became involved with the
two demonstration projects.
   After having had discussions involving the researchers, national agencies, regions, munici-
palities, and people from the two demonstration projects, it was decided to establish an open
source software foundation, called 4S. 4S was established in 2013 and governs both OpenTele
and the infrastructure toolbox. In 2015, the government, regions, and municipalities agreed to
offer telehealth-based treatment to patients suffering from Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Dis-
ease (COPD) by the end of 2019. They also decided to base this on the reference architecture and on
OpenTele [53], [54]. Currently, OpenTele is being redesigned in a sequence of PD projects based
on experiences from ongoing use. At the same time, the software architecture is changed into
micro-services. A number of companies are ready to use the new software as soon as it is ready.
In competition with this, a private company is using the OpenTele open source software to de-
velop closed source versions, where they add several new features without contributing the code
as open source. The activities of the private company have reopened discussions of open versus
closed source among regions and municipalities. Furthermore, in order to strengthen their push
for PD-based open source software, the healthcare fora have upped their activities to demand more
democratic control over design, continued development, and deployment of treatment regimens
and IT support.
   4S was established with a rather traditional role in mind, to govern a collection of open source
software. We have been inspired by the ongoing transformation of the 4S organization and the
vision of the initiative, driven by the close cooperation between healthcare personnel and re-
searches/activists, toward more and more emphasis on work place democracy in combination with
influence by patients and their organizations. And we have learned from the very important role
played by deployment, use, experience, and continued development of software as a vehicle for
demonstrating the implications of the vision and thus for the continued and growing engagement
of personnel and patients. Finally, this initiative has illustrated the importance of working at dif-
ferent levels, e.g., hospital, region, and government, while drawing on and combining arguments,
based in different professions, such as IT and healthcare.

3.10   Summary
In summary, we see the following main qualities of the three projects:
   HISP in many ways represents a long-term perspective with an explicit democracy agenda
with a focus on strengthening possibilities for local action and on internationalization based on a
growing network of quite different national nodes. Thus, HISP is also adding to our understanding
of possibilities and challenges for PD in developing countries. FabLab@School.dk is featured
for its extended network activities, working politically with both informal, and formal political
systems; and for its focus on education for future design and technology skills in a context aimed

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:14                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

at education for democracy. 4S illustrates how open source technologies may become a useful
vehicle for local engagement, play a role in increased democratic control, potentially being a
broker for bridging local and national levels of participation, and for network activities parallel
to those of FabLab@School.dk.
   With these three cases, we are beginning to see possibilities, and hopes for future processes
and structures that embrace participation, whether in classical PD forms or not. They all share the
characteristics that they address important changes related to the lives of the involved partners,
have complex partnerships beyond here-and-now collaboration between direct users and researchers.
They are furthermore characterized by the researchers taking side and working with their partners on
shared visions as well as having an agenda of their own, an agenda that is both a social and political
agenda and a technological one. In the following, we will discuss these elements further and set
the scene for revitalizing participation before we present and discuss the set of basic elements of
our proposed new PD.

4   AGENDA FOR A NEW PD—THE CORE ELEMENTS
In the following, we will discuss the possibilities for a new PD. We see the cases as giving some
leads for where to head, and what we really aim for is an invitation to participate in the continued
codesign and realization of a PD that matters.
   We are not naive when it comes to the possibilities of carrying out this agenda, and certainly
contextualization and revision of means and even ends are important as emphasized by e.g., HCI4D
research. However, it seems that several things are happening in society that may support such
agendas. Piketty [65] described capital accumulation and the rise of what he called patrimonial
capitalism, in which a few families control most of the wealth. Mazzucato [59] talked about how,
in the last financial crisis, big private companies seemed to take the money and the states took
the risk and paid the bills. Socialization of risk, privatization of gain as Mazzucato has put it. In
many areas, jobs are disappearing and it seems that often new investments do not create new jobs.
In many public sectors, the budgets are being reduced and at the same time public spending on
IT is increasing, leading to further cuts in personnel. An increasing awareness of these matters
seems promising for the realization of a PD that empower new groups of people, create new pos-
sibilities in areas important to these people, and impact use and distribution of resources that is
a PD that matters. At the same time, empowering new groups of people will often create strong
opposition, and as stated above contextualization is important, also when it comes to empowering
and handling opposition.
   In the following, we present and discuss five basic elements of our proposed new PD. They are
based on the three inspirational cases presented in Section 4, as well as our re-interpretation of the
first generations of Scandinavian projects. The five elements form the core of the new PD, where
politics matter and a neutral position is not possible:
       (1) PD that matters should address areas where dramatic, potentially negative, changes are un-
           der way, hence forming the basis for engagement and action by researchers and especially
           by partners.
       (2) Partners as a major driver constitutes the second element.
       (3) Researchers, in the dual role of researchers and activists is the third element.
       (4) Researchers and partners cooperating on a vision for high and lasting impact to counteract
           potentially negative developments is number four.
       (5) Safeguarding and developing the impact through democratic control is number five.
  We turn to discuss the five elements across the three cases presented in Section 4, and we
look back on historical PD in order to discuss the possibilities of new and revitalized form of

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                              4:15

participation in design. In Section 6, we proceed with discussing what we may call support action
for this research agenda.

4.1   PD that Matters Should Address Changes that Matter
The potentially negative consequences of the introduction of computers at the shop floor drove
the first and second generation of PD projects in the 1970s and 80s. Today we are witnessing
dramatic, potentially negative, changes in many areas. However, current PD projects unfold in
many different contexts, that are mainly not oriented toward these large, dramatic changes. We
find this problematic and argue that a PD that matters should address changes that matter. To better
understand how this might happen, we look at our three cases.
   The HISP began as a cooperation between South Africa and Norway. As a legacy of apartheid,
the health system in South Africa was inequitable, fragmented according to race and with central-
ized management structures contributing to the marginalization of the black majority [23, p. 237].
HISP put high on its agenda to turn this around.
   The FabLab@school on the one hand was constituted as part of a large move internationally
to address digital literacy and digital fabrication in the school systems. On the other hand,
FabLab@school, with the background of the researchers in PD and design research embraced
the challenge of exploring design thinking in schools, hence aiming to prepare (Danish) school
children to better deal with technology in the future, individually and as society. This focus on
future digital skills, and the potential lack thereof among teachers and pupils, was a major driver
for the project. The lack of digital skills and interest is currently seen as a major threat to the
development of e.g., the Danish society and industry.
   The 4S initiative on Software-based Health Services began at a time where public budgets for
healthcare were being cut and severe negative consequences for both patients and personnel
began to surface. At the same time, public health managers as well as IT companies promoted
telemedicine as a major element in reducing costs and improving healthcare. However, the large,
national telemedicine projects led the people behind the 4S initiative to the conclusion that unless
something was done, telemedicine would become just another element in the managerial control
over healthcare services, emphasizing cost reductions and throughput, being delivered by com-
panies who would charge and earn as much as possible. The 4S initiative set out to address this
situation and emphasize quality as well as spending of money for patient care rather than for
company profit [53], [54].
   Dramatic changes, as we see them in the three cases, relate to the fragmentation of society, the
role of digital literacy, and general attempts of corporations to make money from the public sectors
and for people’s lives at large (e.g., Facebook and Google). Design at large, and PD in particular,
should in our proposal help create alternatives, in terms of both processes and outcomes, that
expose these challenges and offer other possibilities.

4.2   PD that Matters is Based on Engaged Partners
We consider profound cooperation between researchers on the one hand and actors from the
groups experiencing dramatic changes, to be crucial—and we term these actors partners.
   In the 1970s, Trade Union partners were strong and had an agenda of industrial democracy [62],
[37], [77], [35].
   Current PD basically does not have such partners as drivers. On the contrary, the PD researchers
often have to orchestrate and sustain participation by users in specific PD projects [63], [52].
   A new PD that matters, is based on engaged partners, since PD researchers do not create
societal change by themselves. The engagement of partners is closely related to the changes they
experience or expect, and to their hope for major, lasting changes in areas that are important to

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:16                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

them. In some ways, individual partners thus share characteristics with the Lead Users identified
by von Hippel, who notes that lead users expect relatively high benefits regarding the needs they
have encountered [73, Chapter 2]. However, as discussed by Bjögvinsson et al. [6], von Hippel’s
concept of democratizing innovation does not consider aspects that go beyond market economy,
whereas our focus here is on partners that help progress the new technological development
for other than simple commercial reasons. Today, there are often no obvious organizational
frameworks supporting potential partners. Thus, it is part of what is needed from a shared agenda
for researchers and initial partners to develop an understanding of which potential partners to
involve, and how to support the development of the specific cooperation. Hence, developing this
kind of understanding may be a question of trial and error in terms of exploring alliances and new
organizational forms. It also means that the role of the researchers as well as the partners will
and should change over time. Initially, it may be the researchers who are driving the processes
and setting up structures and frameworks, but for long-term development, it is necessary for
partners to take a more active role and responsibility. Partners need support and resources to act,
learn and to exercise influence, and without preexisting organizational frameworks like the trade
unions’ ongoing work on providing resources, as they did in the 1970s, it is an important part
of the projects we discuss here to develop frameworks and attract resources to also involve the
partners.
   In the 4S telemedicine initiative, a few healthcare professionals have been instrumental in the
initial creation of the initiative. They also engaged in the ongoing involvement of healthcare
partners. As the initiative expands, the healthcare partners are now major drivers in overcoming
resistance and developing alliances. The creation of national healthcare fora for discussion and
development of treatment regimens, was one of the first important steps in the transformation
of the initiative from a software governance organization toward more emphasis on work place
democracy in combination with influence to patients and their organizations.
   HISP was initiated in South Africa in 1994 as part of a new government reconstruction and de-
velopment program [23]. From the outset, HISP was based on a partnership between public health
researchers and activists with a background from the anti-apartheid struggle and researchers from
Norway with a background in Scandinavian PD and action research.
   According to Bødker et al. [10], the Fablab@school.dk project engaged with local and national
politicians at several vertical scales, as well as with parents and their organizations (see above) in
order to identify potential strong allies and to find ways of collaborating with these. The difference
between the national and local levels, however, also created tensions that were partially leveraged
by alliances with top international university partners. Bødker et al. [10] also described a search
for strong allied who could support and spread the project in front of political and administrative
decision makers, hence providing the support and alliances surrounding the project. Iversen et al.
[47] discussed the partnership with the pupils as protagonists with whom the project has a strong
partnership beyond here-and-now codesign.
   Across the cases, our analyses made it clear that design at large and PD especially need to
partner not only with future users. Developing, or engaging in, fora where collaboration may
flourish, organizing networks with partners across e.g., local and national levels, and working
with different levels of political systems seem to leverage positive change in the cases we have
looked at and are examples of what is needed.

4.3 PD Researchers Should be Activists
The idea of doing research in the interests of labor was a key element in the early Scandina-
vian PD projects, and as noted above, Marxist theories played an important role in these projects.
Hirschheim and Klein [42] even went as far as to characterize the researchers in the Utopia project

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                              4:17

as labor partisans, even though it was and is highly debatable that we (the Utopia researchers) went
as far as that.
   Today, most researchers in PD as well as HCI probably agree that science is not neutral, yet
we find it important to explore how researchers act in this field of non-neutrality in the new
PD: On the one hand, the researchers are researchers with an interest in understanding the
subject matter of their research better, and with skills to help design technologies together with
partners, do research on new tools and theories, and so on. On the other hand, they are activists
working for a vision that they believe in, a vision of great importance to them, and of great
importance to their partners. In their work as activists, they create opposition of a different
type than as researchers. At the same time, this may cause tensions as people in opposition
to the vision may try to compromise both research and researcher, based on the role as an
activist.
   Furthermore, PD research activities and PD activist activities need different kinds of support and
resources. In the current age, it is quite evident that what counts toward research is publications.
This is what attracts research resources for many researchers. However, in order to also progress
the activist agenda, more long-term engagements are often needed and less easy to fund. This
challenge is not new, even if the push for publication, and the competition for research funding,
are possibly stronger now than ever before. Often there are no obvious way to get resources for
long-term activist activities, and it is part of what is needed from a shared agenda for researchers
and partners to work on providing this kind of resources.
   The creation of national healthcare fora for discussion and development of treatment regimens,
were part of the 4S initiative as was the provision of resources for research in terms of support for
software people to codevelop different aspect of the IT solutions.
   The Fablab@school.dk project has been supported by private foundations interested in
innovation of e.g., the industry (The Danish Industry Foundation), it is leveraged by its con-
nections to Fablab@school at Stanford University, and further, significant funding from private
foundations. The work to make this happen is significant, as discussed in [10], [44], [45], and
[47].
   An activist agenda in our perspective means to get involved, also with the many activities of
forming partnerships and alliances, and with the activities that otherwise support the users in
participating. It means to work with funding schemes outside mainstream research funding, but
first of all, it means to side with particular communities or groups of users and take a stance,
and when others do not agree, conflicts are often immanent. At times, the need to be a respected
researcher and have a future career seems to be a hindrance for this activist role, or at the very
least, a choice to be made. However, our three inspirational cases all illustrate that it is possible,
with hard work and strong partners and allies, to get significant funding for these types of
projects.

4.4   PD that Matters Should have a Vision for High and Lasting Impact
It is an important task for PD researchers/activists and partners, respectively, to negotiate,
maintain, develop, and concretize a shared vision. The vision of the NJMF project [62] was based
on industrial democracy, specifically fighting the lack of democracy as changes were happening
at the shop floor. In current PD projects, it is often not clear that there is a vision, other than
helping researchers do a better design (see, e.g., [72]), or as suggested by Kyng [52], the vision
is about user involvement throughout design and about better systems for all. However, there is
little focus on what happens after design, when the researchers/activists have moved on, and the
users are left to their own devices (A somewhat extreme case of this, designing with homeless
people is discussed in [57]).

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:18                                                                                        S. Bødker and M. Kyng

   We hypothesize that today an overall vision for PD that matters can and should be based on
The good life as opposed to The Competition State (see Section 1. Introduction).10 Where the good
life supports people in living the lives they would like to live, including e.g., good jobs with a
fair wage, education, and healthcare, the Competition State in contrast focuses on conditions that
make companies competitive [27]. The current state of the sharing or platform economy to us
illustrate that many companies are ‘in it for the money’, the users/employees are an instrument
for this, but they are not supported by these companies for wages, education, and healthcare. In
contrast, they are left to their own devices as e.g., court cases against Uber drivers show. However,
a PD that matters is grounded in specific aspects of the life of the partners and these aspects are a
core element of the vision.
   In 4S, the vision of new treatment regimes, where healthcare personnel and patients were the
main innovators, were a strong driver for many partners. In addition, the ideas regarding a differ-
ent economy of software projects and software, and hence more resources for better healthcare,
keep otherwise different partners together. In FabLab@school.dk, the immediate gain for the ac-
tive schools/classes of access to maker technology, is tied in with a strong long-term vision of
digital skills for future generations. The FabLab@school.dk project connected with national and
international agendas regarding the 21st century skills and digital literacy to focus beyond maker
projects in specific schools and classes, hence emphasizing a wider educational agenda. In both 4S
and FabLab@school.dk, the engagement with political levels is part of aiming for lasting impact. In
our reading of the HISP program, the track record of actual and previous partnerships and projects
help sustain the vision and the promise of a lasting impact across partners.
   A vision of high and lasting impact is, in our view, rooted in a vision of how society can be
changed for the better, reemphasizing some of the fundamental assumptions such as fair wages.
Such a vision is certainly in contrast to the visions often connected to current technological de-
velopments such as the so-called sharing economy. Hence, lasting impact also needs to connect to
more profound alternative visions of technology and to how such technologies may be anchored in
the long-term development of use, both of which we see as a challenge to HCI at large. In addition,
such visions are sustained through ongoing negotiation and maintenance among the partners, and
they unfold in ongoing dispute and conflict with opposing visions.

4.5    PD that Matters Strives for Democratic Control of IT
Striving for democratic control over information technology in different contexts is an important
part of a PD that matters. When PD cooperated with Trade Unions, the question of democratic
control was handled by developing models for Trade Union influence on design and deployment
of computers [35, p. 38ff.]. In current PD, the issue of democratic control is basically sidestepped
and the focus is on process and on treating users fairly. What happens after design is left to existing
structures outside the projects.
   In our view, the question of democratic control is one of the most challenging for a new PD. The
lack of democratic ideals in current PD, as well as consequences of this lack, has been debated ex-
tensively in e.g., [5] and [52]. However, to our knowledge the lack of democratic control in relation
to outcome, deployment and future use, and development has not been high on the agenda when
new projects were designed. Nonetheless, it seems that part of what has happened historically,
that we could learn more from today, is the role of education and basic skills for a present and
future with more prominent role of IT.


10 Obviously, proponents of The Competition State will not agree, but we do not believe that this type of disagreement can

be bridged, it is a matter of politics.

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                               4:19

   HISP began as a Norwegian/South African PD project in 1994/5. Democratic control has been
part of their agenda from the start and community ownership is seen as an important prerequisite.
One of the first steps toward democratic control was taken when HISP South Africa was formed
as an independent NGO in the late 1990s [23, p. 240].
   In 4S [53], [54], democratic control is high on the agenda for both partners and PD researchers/
activists. The formation of 4S was originally suggested by the PD researchers as a way of exercising
public control over collections of open source software. Today, the main activities of 4S are carried
out in the board, the software group, and the health forums. The board mainly represents public
health management at the state, regional, and municipality level, the software group consists of
software architects from PD and public healthcare organizations and health fora consist of health
personnel and, to a smaller degree, patient organizations. To strengthen the democratic control,
especially patients, citizens, and healthcare professionals need fora for critical debate, sharing of
experiences and idea generation, and the 4S initiative sees the continued development of the health
fora as crucial [53].
   Fablab@school.dk works in a setting of public schools and government-run programs that are
already, but in rater complicated manners, controlled democratically: Bødker et al. [10] described
the mixture of legislation being controlled by parliament and budgets by municipal governments
and local school boards. However, it is not obvious that these are appropriate for control over the
project as such and Bødker et al. [10] described a number of activities to engage users at various
levels. Fablab@school.dk has explicitly on its agenda to develop future skills in the digital domain,
primarily for the school children, but secondarily also for the other groups surrounding the ed-
ucational activities and the project as such (teachers, parents, and local politicians). Education is
a useful element in opening up democratic debates, in particular, regarding technology which is
often considered an expert domain for the few.
   Democratic control is happening in the three cases we discuss, yet in some instances, such con-
trol could be developed even further, and in particular perhaps, in a more long-term perspective.
We will, in relation to democratic control, also emphasize the role of education of the relevant
partners and allies to participate in PD processes and in using and envisioning technologies in a
longer time-scale.

4.6    The First Part of Our Agenda
This ends our presentation of the five core elements of the new PD, the five elements where politics
matters, and a neutral position is not possible. In the following section, we move on to the last six
elements of our new PD, elements which can be said to be the support action, with more technical
content.

5 AGENDA FOR A NEW PD—THE SUPPORT ACTION
In this section, we present and discuss a second, and last, set of elements that are important when
developing a new PD that matters. We see these last six elements as crucial for the success of
initiatives based on our proposed new PD, at the same time, however, they are more technical and
we have named the set of elements support action. Like the five core elements, the support action
is also based on the three inspirational cases presented in Section 4, as well as our reinterpretation
of the first generations of Scandinavian projects.

      (1) High technological ambitions are necessary in order to influence our technological future.
      (2) Deployment of working prototypes is an important tool for creating impact and experiences,
          and for sustaining a PD initiative over prolonged periods of time.

          ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:20                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

       (3) Alliances with other actors beside the direct partners are an important part of creating and
           sustaining impact.
       (4) Furthermore, we need to consider how to develop and use ideas and results on a larger
           scale—how to scale up.
       (5) In addition, we need to understand the issue of success vs. failure.
       (6) Finally, we stress thatnew PD is also action research.

5.1 PD that Matters have High Technological Ambitions
A new PD should be based on a concern for influencing our common technological future. Al-
though much important work can be done without high technological ambitions, for those of us
who want high and lasting impact on future technology, we advocate high technological ambitions
as well as persistent questioning of even the most advanced technologies at hand. For instance,
if we do not want to depend on Facebook, we should not make solutions based on Facebook but
rather help find and develop alternatives. For us, high technological ambitions are not as such in
conflict with processes that explore user needs, and where ultimately these processes do not as
such lead to the introduction of new technologies.
   It is indeed appropriate for PD projects to explore the possibilities of Facebook or 3D-printing
with various community groups (to pick some examples). However, we find it problematic to take
these technologies for granted, because this way we do not help users understand and question
the fundamental assumptions in the technologies, and e.g., the commercial interests behind them.
Hence, we propose to have higher technological ambitions. At the same time, we do not advocate
for PD projects that investigate a few new technological aspects without any plans for actual use,
a concern we share, e.g., with Bratteteig and Wagner [25]. We believe there is a strategic concern
in how we, as technological researchers, help push for technological change. Korsgaard et al. [50,
p. 73] support this: Although there may be arguments for basing solutions on existing frameworks
within the user domain (integration, sustainability, familiarity, licensing etc.), this development comes
with implications that are important in PD research.” They go on to discuss how the taken-for-
grantedness of the technology, of users and researchers is problematic because they then cannot
be critical towards the technology. Hence, alternatives are needed. “Alternatives help both users
and designers imagine beyond the taken-for-granted. Uncritically adoption may make researchers
and user insensitive toward the ideological premise embedded within the (commercial) platforms.
   High technological ambitions were introduced in the Utopia project, and the failure to deliver
a working system may be the most important factor in understanding why the project was not
followed by new Trade Union based projects as discussed.
   In HISP, the initial ambition was to identify information needs and support interim district man-
agement teams [23, p. 238]. In the first years, high ambitions concerned the application of rapid
prototyping and what is called “builds” being released weekly or even daily. As HISP developed
they adopted new technology like cloud computing and the ability to add new features daily while
in full production. At the same time, they have continuously worked on integrated health infor-
mation architectures, according to Braa and Sahay [23, p. 250ff.].
   In 4S, the initial software architecture is currently being substituted by a micro-service architec-
ture. The micro-services are intended to function as a continually expanding set of building-blocks
which are expected to form the technical core in a software ecosystem, and the basis for the con-
struction of highly flexible support for a constantly evolving set of new treatment regimens and
uses of health IT, that will eventually supplant monolith like current electronic patient record
systems.
   To succeed with new PD initiatives, we see high technological ambitions as an important aspect.
It is simply important that research finds ways of developing viable technical alternatives, that

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                4:21

serve users well and are technically sound. Hence, we want to develop alternatives to current and
future commercial systems. These alternatives seem to have a way forward if they are technically
infrastructured with other technologies, and based on open rather than proprietary platforms. This
also requires digital literacy in some form or other and hence education for digital literacy is an
equally important component (see also [10]).

5.2 PD that Matters Builds Working Prototypes
There are indeed many tools in the PD toolbox. In our view, however, the deployment of working
prototypes is important for creating experiences and impact, and thus for sustaining a PD initiative
over prolonged periods of time. The use of mock-ups has since the Utopia project [10] been a
pivotal tool for exploring and evaluating concepts and designs as well as to demonstrate these to
people outside the design group. However, there is a fundamental difference between mock-ups
and working prototypes especially when it comes to sustaining a PD initiative over prolonged
periods of time: A mock-up is about giving form to concepts and designs but not about actual use.
Thus, a mock-up is not, and will never become, an important part of the daily life of partners since
it does not support them in their daily activities. Deployment of working prototypes in daily use in
contrast means, that some of the partners can be involved in the PD initiative on a daily basis. It is
certainly not sufficient to have a working prototype for this to happen, but it is indeed necessary,
as discussed also by Voss and collaborators, e.g., in [41] and [74].
    Furthermore, to use a working prototype over prolonged periods of time makes it possible to
codevelop and redevelop the technology in interplay with the processes of use. In other words,
working prototypes make appropriation possible, and can support the users in making more rad-
ical changes, and—if the use process is followed actively—support changes initiated by the re-
searchers. Finally, with a stable, working prototype, it is possible to begin to scale up and involve
new groups in other organizations. In this sense, working prototypes are important for education
and understanding among users.
    The issue of working prototypes was not on the agenda for the first generation of PD projects.
Rather, they left actual development of systems to management-controlled projects and IT com-
panies. In the Utopia project, the key idea was to change this and expand local choice through
centrally developed alternatives. However, the project did not succeed in making alternatives avail-
able. Without a viable technological alternative, there were also no viable alternative ways of or-
ganizing work and in the end no strong push from the Trade Unions to continue development
of technology and organization. For the involved researchers, a simpler and rewarding path was
to expand their international cooperation on tools and techniques and better systems for all. This
development is reflected in e.g., the book Design at Work [36] and major European Union projects
like Palpable Computing.11
    Many current PD projects do not develop working prototypes, but stop at exploration of new
concepts. Hence, the results only live on in research papers. This is the natural way of doing
research, and since basically all PD projects are initiated, planned, and managed by PD researchers,
it is probably not surprising. However, as discussed in e.g., [52], research papers are usually not a
very positive type of result for the involved users (see also discussion in [25]).
    Some PD projects have produced and deployed working prototypes and some have been turned
into products, e.g., in the Dragon project12 [29] and the iHospital project.13 But these PD projects

11 Palcom webpage: www.ist-palcom.org, accessed January 19, 2017.
12 COT webpage. 1998. Case 5: Dragon Object-Oriented Architecture of a Global Customer Service System. www.cit.dk/

COT/case5-eng.html, accessed January 19, 2017.
13 http://www.ihospital.dk/.



           ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:22                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

were just that projects. When the prototypes were transformed to products, new organizational
contexts were created and in this process the PD aspects, as well as democratic ideals, were lost
and traditional commercial interests took over [53].
   In the 4S initiative, the visions of public ownership to software via open source, local control
of organization, use, and IT-solution and of development of treatment regimens in cooperation
between patients, health professionals, and care workers were developed by deploying working
prototypes or pilots, e.g., for pregnant women with complicated pregnancies and the personnel
involved in their treatment [53].
   In HISP, the deployed systems largely functioned as working prototypes for further projects
supporting the vision of equitable health services in decentralized and empowering structures
with local control of data [23].
   In the two projects, we have seen how working prototypes, and especially how working with
prototypes on a daily basis, have been used to sustain PD initiatives over prolonged periods of
time. A working prototype is necessary for sustainability of the processes.

5.3    PD that Matters Must Develop Strong Alliances
To fight negative changes and create high and lasting positive impact a researcher/activist/partner-
based initiative needs to develop and maintain numerous alliances. And alliances are also impor-
tant for the generation of resources, including funding.
   For the first generation of PD projects alliances were not really an issue: The Trade Union part-
ners and the university setting of the 1970s were sufficient to create action possibilities and to
secure resources and funding. For instance, the DUE project was supported by the research coun-
cil of the Danish Trade Union Council.
   For the Utopia project the Trade Union partners and the university environment were still very
important, but in addition the cooperation agreement with the IT company expected to develop a
system based on the Utopia specifications was also important for the funding of the project [11,
p. 258].
   Most current PD projects seem to be quite similar to other types of research projects when it
comes to alliances, i.e., alliances may be important to secure funding, to get access to organizations
and their employees, to keep employees interested in prolonged participation or to carry out ex-
periments with specific technologies. However, due to the emphasis on fair involvement of users
in many current PD projects, some authors have discussed the need for creating alliances with
management in order to secure more fair conditions for the participating users, see e.g., [1].
   In the HISP program, alliances were created with various levels of local administrations and
politicians, and at the same time funding alliances secured rather large amounts of money for the
program.14
   Bødker et al. [10] described the alliances and policymaking necessary for the FabLab@school:
At one level, PD activities happen in partnership with specific schools, pupils, parents, and
school staff. On the other hand, e.g., teaching curriculum and funding for schools are happening
in two parallel political systems, a national and a local one, and hence, Fablab@school.dk has
worked through activities/workshops with politicians locally, and nationally, working with civil
servants, locally, nationally, as well as at the EU level. Currently, these alliances have led to
Fablab@school.dk being involved with national curriculum development as a result of these
alliances.
   In the 4S case, alliances have been developed with regional hospital owners and IT departments,
government agencies working with health IT, and to some degree with municipalities as well as

14 HISP webpage: www.hisp.org, accessed January 19, 2017.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                               4:23

with private companies. Part of developing these alliances has been developing exemplary business
models for IT companies based on open source.
   PD projects, like other projects, are limited in time, and since the results of PD projects are usu-
ally limited to research papers, the issue of alliances is usually not extended beyond the timeframe
of the project. A PD that matters, on the other hand, has to create, maintain, and develop complex
alliances in order to be able to continue working for realizing the vision, including get support for
deployment of solutions developed and the resources to continue development—thus alliances are
often a matter of life or death.

5.4 PD that Matters Must Explore Larger Scales
In the first PD projects, scaling up was carried out through education in the form of books and
courses for shop stewards. The focus was on implications of computer use in different kinds of
industries and how to deal with introduction of computers at the workplace. In the Utopia projects,
the Trade Unions also played a major role in scaling up, in terms of distribution and use of results
from the project. For example, Graffiti 7, the popular end report of the Utopia project, was produced
in 70,000 copies in five languages [12]. In addition, the plans to develop and market a commercial
product were important elements in scaling up, even though this development actually failed in the
end. As a consequence, long-term scaling up was reduced to the area of PD research, and focused
on tools and techniques.
   Few contemporary projects discuss scaling up beyond the specific activities, as we have seen
above. Bødker and Zander’s discussions of the possibilities in the municipal sector [18] may be
an exception though they provide more questions than answers e.g., when they discuss the role
of municipal democracy and its strategic discussions in the meeting with engagement and partic-
ipation of municipal workers who also want to exercise their influence from this perspective. In
those cases where scaling up beyond research papers has happened, it has been through the devel-
opment and marketing and/or deployment of commercial products as with the system developed
for the Maersk shipping company15 and the hospital logistics system developed in the iHospital
project.16
   In this sense, these PD projects have scaled up just like any other commercial start-up, and
we may even say that they are more part of the problem than a solution to the challenges of
globalization since they try to build a multi-million-dollar business controlled by the few owners,
not by users. Many initiatives trying to deal with the negative aspects of globalization are locally
anchored. They try for instance to reduce global dependencies and focus on developing local
resources e.g., through ecological farming. Bødker et al. [16], [15] presented the case of a Local
Organic Food Community which under the heading of “A farmer, a place and at least 20 members”
has now grown into a bottom-up community of about 900 members distributing locally produced
organic produce and eggs. The irony of this and many other bottom-up communities is that
despite this local anchoring, they easily become dependent on global, proprietary software such
as Facebook (see [16], [15]). Scaling up was attempted by development of a common technical
platform across some similar food-sharing communities, yet this scaling up was difficult due to
the wish for control by each community, as well as due to limited resources.
   In both HISP [23] and 4S [53], open source software are key elements, and thus scaling up is
financially not as demanding as when physical products are the main element.


15 COT webpage. 1998. Case 5: Dragon Object-Oriented Architecture of a Global Customer Service System. www.cit.dk/

COT/case5-eng.html, accessed January 19, 2017.
16 http://www.ihospital.dk/.



          ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:24                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

   However, when democratic control and continued PD are crucial, scaling up is still very chal-
lenging, and we hypothesize that scaling up usually will require an ongoing effort of maintenance
and development of the scaling up itself. Scaling up includes e.g., structures and processes of
control and the handling of resources, “large-scale” PD processes and coordinating technological
solutions, deployment, and use.
   Some of these issues are handled in many well-known organizational settings, but will have
to be dealt with in quite different ways in a PD initiative. To illustrate: Many international IT
companies coordinate technological development and deployment worldwide and financing is
handled via e.g., shares and loans or kickstarter.com. And although kickstarter.com has several
attractive features, it does not seem to be immediately applicable since it basically reduces to a
consumer/producer relation. In the HISP case, an international, organizational network has been
developed. As mentioned above, a prominent member of this is a South African not-for-profit NGO
with more than 50 full-time staff. On the software side, scaling up is facilitated by a cloud-based
server hosted by the HISP team at the University of Oslo, which is also handling the core devel-
opment of the software and implementation support.17 In 4S, a new microservice architecture and
a new quality-control system have been developed, in part to facilitate scaling up.18 The issue of
scaling up in relation to democratic control has not been addressed by the 4S initiative yet.
   Scaling up, or, how to apply and further develop good ideas on a larger scale, is important to
this kind of initiatives. A PD that matters is about people and usually locally anchored, and to
apply and develop ideas and results on a larger scale challenges core political elements, especially
democratic control. On the other hand, to fight negative changes and create high and lasting im-
pact usually requires going from local to large scale as we have seen discussed above. So far, the
Fablab@school.dk project and the 4S initiative, try to deal with scaling to a limited extent, also
through the newest technological possibilities, for good and bad. Eventually, they probably have
to scale-up in order to continue to attract and engage partners. To this end, they may look to HISP
for inspiration.

5.5 PD that Matters Must Address its Successes and Failures
In many research projects, failure with respect to outcome can be turned into research papers.
However, in PD that matters, success in terms of outcome is often necessary in order to continue
to work toward the vision. The success of the first PD projects was largely a result of a then
unconventional research approach based on close cooperation between committed researchers
with an activist stance and local unions at the factory level, and with support from the national
trade unions.
   In the Utopia project, success was, to a large extent, a matter of making an alternative system for
newspaper production available for Nordic newspapers. As mentioned earlier, in order to design
such a system, the project developed new design methods, techniques, and tools. This made the
project a success from the PD researchers point of view, because the methods were publishable
in the international, academic literature. However, for the unions and the workers, the lack of a
viable alternative was a major failure. Even though the researchers tried to draw attention to desk-
top publishing, this got no support from the unions, who were entirely focusing on newspapers.
Furthermore, the suggested desktop publishing initiative was primarily educational, standing in
the way of the PD researchers’ careers as researchers.


17 HISP webpage: www.hisp.org, accessed January 19, 2017, HISP at UiO webpage: www.mn.uio.no/ifi/english/research/

networks/hisp/, accessed January 19, 2017.
18 4S webpage: 4S-online.dk, accessed January 19, 2017.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                              4:25

   In current PD, the notion of success is usually related to processes during a project and research
papers after, not to outcomes for the participating users. And as discussed above some projects,
which are a success for the researchers did not produce useful results for the participating users,
see also [1], [24], and [25]. As with Utopia before, researchers are often more interested in moving
on to the next research project, especially if their employer does not offer them much choice except
being involved in a new research project.
   In HISP, the initial successful development of IT in support of decentralized and empowering
structures was the basis for two decades of ongoing work, and in the case of 4S, the successful
deployment of the software in two national demonstration projects was the reason for the contin-
ued support from partners and the development of alliances. In FabLab@school.dk, it is similarly
the local fablabs that provide the early, and visible steps of a success, because they engage pupils,
teachers, and for that matter parents locally and because the fablab spaces are very visible. How-
ever, ultimately the risks seem to lie at other organizational levels and on longer time-scales, where
the infrastructure as such needs support and sustaining, and e.g., work needs to happen to change
the school curricula nationally, where fablabs and digital thinking compete for time, room, and
teacher competencies.
   A PD initiative that matters and face big issues will also face big, sometimes unforeseen, chal-
lenges and high risks of failure. And although PD researchers may learn a lot also from failures,
success is important for our vision, our partners and for ourselves in the role of PD activists.

5.6   PD that Matters is Action Research
In the first Scandinavian project, the Norwegian NJMF, as well as in the Utopia project, important
parts of the research approaches and design techniques were developed “on the fly” based on
needs that arose during the work. They were primarily action research projects aiming to provide
change for the users, as we illustrate above. Participatory design, while important, came next, and
was embedded in these other forms of research. In current PD, we find that focus is usually on
refinements of ideas and techniques, not on major shifts, seeded from outside the PD processes.
   Acute attention to emerging needs, also outside the field of PD, is important and often vital for
success. At the same time, the contributions of the researchers also come from their professional
insights, and not just in PD methods. It is important that the people working on a PD initiative
that matters are willing to work with new issues when the need arises. BAlka [1] in her discus-
sion of Kyng [52] addresses the connection between PD and Action Research. She concludes her
discussions with a concern for whether or not we can see evidence of users’ design influences in
the technologies whose development they contribute to, or in work practices that work better from end
users’ perspectives, she finds Action Research instrumental in helping researchers remain focussed
on our scope of influence and (...) guard against “engaging in politically correct research with little
scope of influence.” [1, p. 81]
   HISP is explicitly based on an action research approach, as well as on PD, and they list open
source as one of the important elements in their strategy, which they find important in connection
with current technological developments in this area [23, p. 255]. Bødker et al. [10] largely pointed
to the many types of activities needed to carry out a project as organizationally and technologically
diverse as FabLab@school.dk. The 4S initiative on telemedicine has worked with both innovation
theory, business models, and open source. In addition, quality control and the cost of CE-marking
software according to e.g., the European Union Medical Device Directive became a major issue
and was close to make the software too expensive to use if they wanted to establish an ongoing
process of development based on PD. However, the 4S team had the resources to make a small
project that succeeded in developing a new model for quality control and CE-marking of systems
build from open source modules.

         ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:26                                                                                     S. Bødker and M. Kyng

   An action research approach can facilitate discussions of how researchers continue to contribute
to projects and visions, especially when unforeseen needs arise, and the approach may help avoid-
ing “PD tunnel vision” (see also [53]). This is a further illustration of how researchers have, and
must have a research agenda that is their own.

6 MOVING TOWARD A PD THAT MATTERS
Our proposal for a new PD that matters is based on both on the early history of Scandinavian
PD, the limitations of current PD and HCI at large and a few exemplary initiatives. None of the
cases we have studied are perfect but they do think beyond making a handful of direct participants
happy, here, and now.
   However, to evaluate our ideas and develop them further, we need extensive concrete experience
as well as further research on several intriguing theoretical aspects of PD and HCI. This means
for us and others to engage in action research-like initiatives and focus on how to increase the
influence of groups of people in areas that are important to them. This will be done in the continued
work on the 4S telehealth initiative and hopefully in an increasing number of new initiatives.
   In the search for new initiatives, we find that areas that are publicly financed and managed,
e.g., education and health in the Nordic countries are good candidates since the public element
gives claims about democratic control a broader appeal and makes the creation of strong alliances
more likely than in entirely commercial settings. In addition, the combination of reduced budgets
for welfare, reduced company taxes, and increased tax evasion makes many people look for non-
commercial alternatives in these areas.
   All the same, the call for transnational multi-stakeholder cooperation to ensure fair working
conditions in digital labor platforms19 by the Network of European and North American labor unions
and worker organizations could also provide a possibility for new PD initiatives that draw on some
of the knowledge-building aspect of the early Scandinavian projects. We will not make further
specific suggestions for new initiatives. However, we will briefly mention two related areas of
work that we want to look into in the future, and then we present a shortlist of issues that we have
identified as in need of new research.
   The two relevant areas to look more into are HCI4D and work on digital thinking and produc-
tion. With the recent developments in HCI4D toward conflict zones; literacy; infant mortality; ru-
ral and urban community development; and marginalized populations we consider it a potentially
very useful source of cases and theories that go beyond the taken for granted in Western societies.
Work like that of [76], which theoretically ground their work on community consensus in the con-
cept of “Ubuntu” can be seen as useful supplement to the HISP case. The Fablab@School.dk project
is not alone with addressing digital understanding and production. In the work of Kafai et al. [48],
they focus on youths’ critical understanding of new media, and DYI in order to understand the
participatory competencies of youths. With this in mind, makerspaces and sustainability certainly
have potentials for a future PD that matters.
   Issues in need of new research are first of all, the two roles of researchers in the new PD: On
the one hand, they work as researchers, on the other hand, as activists working for a vision with
their partners. In addition, we find hope in e.g., the recent work of Forlano and HAlpern [56] in
revitalizing work with labor activists with this perspective in mind, as labor activists are important
when it comes to considering wages and welfare even in the current millennium.
   Second, when success depends on working prototypes and deployment of products, we need
to better understand how relations among research, activism, and the work by partners develop
over time, as deployment and use scales up. Accordingly, scale takes a new role for research both

19 http://crowdwork-igmetall.de/, accessed January 5, 2017.



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                   4:27

regarding time and use. This adds to concerns for time and deployment discussed e.g., in relation
to infrastructuring (see [66], [10], [58]).
   Third, we want to learn more about how to develop and sustain organizational frameworks for
democratic control, critical debate, development of visions and politics, and how new organiza-
tional frameworks interact with existing ones. With our analysis of the state of the field of HCI at
large, this seems a necessary concern for the field of HCI, if it wants to escape the iron grip of the
big corporations (see e.g., discussion of Google’s implicit data gathering in [72]). In this field, we
see an emerging critical debate (e.g., in [3]) but the step toward constructive visions has not yet
been made.
   Fourth, like with the early projects, we see a new need for public debate and education of the
public, through the educational system, such as FabLab@school.dk, through profession-based and
trade union channels and through the media.
   Finally, we see a number of issues related to the relations between a PD project, limited in
time and space, and our ideas about high and especially lasting impact. Thus, we would like to
investigate different aspects of series, or networks, of projects that are part of the same initiative.
HISP has much to offer concerning these issues.
   Our agenda for a PD that matters calls for the help of—and critique by—many partners as well as
strong alliances, also in the research community. Long-term commitment by researcher activists is
important, but perhaps also more difficult than ever. At the same time, more than ever, it seems im-
portant to come up with strong, democratic visions fueled by ambitious technological alternatives.

7 CONCLUSION
Dramatic changes will happen over the next decades, computers will play a major role, and a
marginalization of the many in relation to power and technology seems unpleasantly likely. How-
ever, we believe that a new PD can play a role in fighting for democratic influence, and influence
the entire field of HCI in doing so. At the same time, such new PD initiatives may be at odds
with the traditional demands on university researchers and require that the people involved allow
themselves to emphasize working as activist more so than as researchers.

REFERENCES
[1] Ellen Balka. 2010. Broadening discussion about participatory design. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 22,
    1 (2010), 77–84.
[2] Liam Bannon. 1992. Design at Work. L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA. Chapter from Human Factors to
    Human Actors: The Role of Psychology and Human-computer Interaction Studies in System Design, 25–44. Retrieved
    from: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=125470.125458
[3] Shaowen Bardzell. 2017. Utopias of participation: Feminism, design, and the futures. ACM Transactions on Computer-
    Human Interaction 25, 1 (2017), 1–24.
[4] Ditte Amund Basballe, Kim Halskov, and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen. 2016. The early shaping of participatory design
    at PDC. In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Interactive Exhibitions, Workshops –
    Volume 2 (PDC’16). ACM, New York, NY, 21–24. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2948076.2948078
[5] Eevi E. Beck. 2002. P for political: Participation is not enough. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14, 1
    (2002), 77–92. Retrieved from: https://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol14/iss1/1
[6] Erling Björgvinsson, Pelle Ehn, and Per-Anders Hillgren. 2012. Agonistic participatory design: Working with
    marginalised social movements. CoDesign 8, 2–3 (2012), 127–144. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2012.672577
[7] Susanne Bødker. 1993. The AT-project: Practical research in cooperative design. DAIMI Report Series 22, 454 (1993).
    DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7146/dpb.v22i454.6772
[8] Susanne Bødker. 2006. When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic
    Conference on Human-computer Interaction: Changing Roles (NordiCHI’06). ACM, New York, NY, 1–8. DOI:http://
    dx.doi.org/10.1145/1182475.1182476
[9] Susanne Bødker. 2015. Using IT to ‘do good’ in communities?The Journal of Community Informatics 11, 2 (2015).
    Retrieved from: http://ci-journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/view/1151.

          ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:28                                                                                        S. Bødker and M. Kyng

[10] Susanne Bødker, Christian Dindler, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2017. Tying knots: Participatory infrastructuring at work.
     Computer Supported Cooperative Work 26, 1–2 (Apr. 2017), 245–273. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10606-017-9268-y
[11] Susanne Bødker, Pelle Ehn, John Kammersgaard, Morten Kyng, and Yngve Sundblad. 1987. A utopian experience: On
     design of powerful computer-based tools for skilled graphic workers. Computers and Democracy - A Scandinavian
     Challenge, Gro Bjerknes, Pelle Ehn, and Morten Kyng (Eds.), Gower Publishing Ltd, 251–278.
[12] Susanne Bødker, Pelle Ehn, Dan Sjögren, and Staffan Romberger. 1985. The UTOPIA Project: An Alternative in Text
     and Images (Graffiti 7). Swedish Center for Working Life.
[13] Susanne Bødker, Pelle Ehn, Dan Sjögren, and Yngve Sundblad. 2000. Cooperative design perspectives on 20 years
     with “the scandinavian IT design model”. In Proceedings of the First Nordic Conference on Human-computer Interaction.
     ACM.
[14] Susanne Bødker, Kaj Grønbæk, and Morten Kyng. 1993. Cooperative design: Techniques and experiences from the
     Scandinavian scene. In Participatory Design: Principles and Practices, Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka (Eds.), L.
     Erlbaum Assoc. Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 157–175.
[15] Susanne Bødker, Henrik Korsgaard, Peter Lyle, and Joanna Saad-Sulonen. 2016. Happenstance, strategies and tactics:
     Intrinsic design in a volunteer-based community. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
     Interaction (NordiCHI’16). ACM, New York, NY, Article 10, 10 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2971564
[16] Susanne Bødker, Henrik Korsgaard, and Joanna Saad-Sulonen. 2016. ‘A farmer, a place and at least 20 members’:
     The development of artifact ecologies in volunteer-based communities. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on
     Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW’16). ACM, New York, NY, 1142–1156. DOI:http://
     dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820029
[17] Susanne Bødker and Yngve Sundblad. 2008. Usability and interaction design-new challenges for the scandinavian
     tradition. Behaviour & Information Technology 27, 4 (Jul. 2008), 293–300. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0144929070
     1760682
[18] Susanne Bødker and Pär-Ola Zander. 2015. Participation in design between public sector and local communities.
     In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies (C&T’15). ACM, New York, NY,
     49–58. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2768545.2768546
[19] Morten Bohøj, Nikolaj Gandrup Borchorst, Niels Olof Bouvin, Susanne Bødker, and Pär-Ola Zander. 2010. Timeline
     collaboration. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’10). ACM, New
     York, NY, 523–532. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753404
[20] Claus Bossen, Christian Dindler, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2010. User gains and PD aims: Assessment from a participatory
     design project. In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference (PDC’10). ACM, New York, NY, 141–
     150. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1900441.1900461
[21] Claus Bossen, Christian Dindler, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2012. Impediments to user gains: Experiences from a critical
     participatory design project. In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers - Volume 1
     (PDC’12). ACM, New York, NY, 31–40. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2347635.2347641
[22] John Bowers, Graham Button, and Wes Sharrock. 1995. Workflow from within and without: Technology and co-
     operative work on the print industry shopfloor. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on European Conference
     on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW’95). Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, 51–66. http://
     dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1241958.1241962
[23] Jørn Braa and Sundeep Sahay. 2012. Health information systems programme: Participatory design within the HISP
     network. In Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design. J. Simonsen and T. Robertson (Eds.), Routledge,
     235–256.
[24] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2016. Unpacking the notion of participation in participatory design. Computer Sup-
     ported Cooperative Work 25, 6 (Dec. 2016), 425–475. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10606-016-9259-4
[25] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner. 2016. What is a participatory design result? In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory
     Design Conference: Full Papers - Volume 1 (PDC’16). ACM, New York, NY, 141–150. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
     2940299.2940316
[26] John Carroll, Patrick Shih, and Jessica Kropczynski. 2015. Community informatics as innovation in sociotechnical
     infrastructures. The Journal of Community Informatics 11, 2 (2015). Retrieved from: http://ci-journal.net/index.php/
     ciej/article/view/1153.
[27] Philip G. Cerny. 1997. Paradoxes of the competition state: The dynamics of political globalization. Government and
     Opposition 32, 2 (1997), 251–274. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.1997.tb00161.x
[28] Marshini Chetty and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2007. HCI4D: Hci challenges in the global south. In CHI’07 Extended Abstracts
     on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’07). ACM, New York, NY, 2327–2332. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
     1240866.1241002
[29] Michael Christensen, Andy Crabtree, Christian Heide Damm, Klaus Marius Hansen, Ole Lehrmann Madsen, Pernille
     Marqvardsen, Preben Mogensen, Elmer Sandvad, Lennert Sloth, and Michael Thomsen. 1998. The M.A.D. experience:


ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                       4:29

       Multiperspective application development in evolutionary prototyping. In Proceedings of the 12th European Conference
       on Object-Oriented Programming (ECCOP’98). Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 13–40. Retrieved from: http://dl.acm.org/
       citation.cfm?id=646155.679686
[30]   Christian Dindler, Eva Eriksson, and Peter Dalsgaard. 2016. A large-scale design thinking project seen from the
       perspective of participants. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI’16).
       ACM, New York, NY, Article 54, 10 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2971559
[31]   Christian Dindler and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2014. Relational expertise in participatory design. In Proceedings of the 13th
       Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers - Volume 1 (PDC’14). ACM, New York, NY, 41–50. DOI:http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1145/2661435.2661452
[32]   Carl DiSalvo. 2012. Adversarial Design. The MIT Press.
[33]   Pelle Ehn. 2014. Utopias lost and futures-in-the-making: Marginal notes on innovation, design and democracy. In
       Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral
       Consortium Papers, and Keynote Abstracts - Volume 2 (PDC’14). ACM, New York, NY, 191–193. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/
       10.1145/2662155.2662214
[34]   P. Ehn and M. Kyng. 1986. A tool perspective on design of interactive computer support for skilled workers. DAIMI
       Report Series 14, 190 (1986).
[35]   Pelle Ehn and Morten Kyng. 1987. The collective resource approach to systems design. In Computers and Democracy
       - A Scandinavian Challenge. Gro Bjerknes, Pelle Ehn, and Morten Kyng (Eds.), Gower Publishing Ltd, 17–58.
[36]   Pelle Ehn and Morten Kyng. 1992. Cardboard computers: Mocking-it-up or hands-on the future. In Design at Work,
       Joan Greenbaum and Morten Kyng (Eds.), L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, 169–196.
[37]   Pelle Ehn and Ake Sandberg. 1979. Företagsstyrning och Löntagarmakt. Prisma.
[38]   Pelle Ehn and Ake Sandberg. 1983. Local union influence on technology and work organization – Some results from
       the demos project. In Proceedings of the IFIP WG 9.1 Working Conference on Systems Design For, With, and by the Users,
       Riva Del Sole, Italy, 20–24 September 1982. North-Holland, 427–437. Retrieved from: https://books.google.dk/books?
       id=72NPAAAAMAAJ.
[39]   Jonathan Grudin. 1999. CSCW and groupware: Their history and trajectory. Designing Communication and Collabo-
       ration Support Systems, Y. Matsushita (Ed.), Gordon and Breach Science Publishers Amsterdam, 1–15.
[40]   Kim Halskov and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen. 2015. The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC
       2002–2012. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 74, C (Feb. 2015), 81–92. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
       j.ijhcs.2014.09.003
[41]   Mark Hartswood, Rob Procter, Roger Slack, James Soutter, Alex Voß, and Mark Rouncefield. 2002. The benefits of a
       long engagement: From contextual design to the co-realisation of work affording artefacts. In Proceedings of the 2nd
       Nordic Conference on Human-computer Interaction (NordiCHI’02). ACM, New York, NY, 283–286. DOI:http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1145/572020.572066
[42]   Rudy Hirschheim and Heinz K. Klein. 1989. Four paradigms of information systems development. Communications
       of the ACM 32, 10 (Oct. 1989), 1199–1216. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/67933.67937
[43]   Kristin Lofthus Hope and Eva Amdahl. 2011. Configuring designers? Using one agile project management methodol-
       ogy to achieve user participation. New Technology, Work and Employment 26, 1 (2011), 54–67. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/
       10.1111/j.1468-005X.2010.00257.x
[44]   Ole Sejer Iversen and Christian Dindler. 2013. A utopian agenda in child computer interaction. International Journal
       of Child-Computer Interaction 1, 1 (2013), 24–29. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2012.08.002
[45]   Ole Sejer Iversen and Christian Dindler. 2014. Sustaining participatory design initiatives. CoDesign 10, 3–4 (2014),
       153–170. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2014.963124
[46]   Ole Sejer Iversen, Anne Marie Kanstrup, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2004. A visit to the ‘new utopia’: Revitalizing
       democracy, emancipation and quality in co-operative design. In Proceedings of the Third Nordic Conference on Human-
       computer Interaction (NordiCHI’04). ACM, New York, NY, 171–179. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1028014.1028040
[47]   Ole Sejer Iversen, Rachel Charlotte Smith, and Christian Dindler. 2017. Child as protagonist: Expanding the role of
       children in participatory design. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC’17).
       ACM, New York, NY, 27–37. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3078072.3079725
[48]   Yasmin B. Kafai, Kylie A. Peppler, Jay Lemke, and Mark Warschauer. 2011. Youth, technology, and DIY: Developing
       participatory competencies in creative media production. Review of Research in Education 35 (2011), 89–119. Retrieved
       from: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41349013
[49]   Finn Kensing and Jeanette Blomberg. 1998. Participatory design: Issues and concerns. Computer Supported Cooperative
       Work 7, 3–4 (Jan. 1998), 167–185. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1008689307411
[50]   Henrik Korsgaard, Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose, and Susanne Bødker. 2016. Computational alternatives in partic-
       ipatory design: Putting the T back in socio-technical research. In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Confer-
       ence: Full Papers-Volume 1. ACM, 71–79.


            ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
4:30                                                                                           S. Bødker and M. Kyng

[51] Morten Kyng. 1998. Users and computers: A contextual approach to design of computer artifacts. Scandinavian Journal
     of Information System 10, 1–2 (Dec. 1998), 7–43. Retrieved from: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=347210.347228
[52] Morten Kyng. 2010. Bridging the gap between politics and techniques. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems
     22, 1 (2010), 49–68. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/tl_files/volumes/Volume22/no1/Shapiro.pdf.
[53] Morten Kyng. 2015. On Creating and Sustaining Alternatives: The Case of Danish Telehealth. Department of Computer
     Science, Aarhus University. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7146/aahcc.v1i1.21297
[54] Morten Kyng. 2016. Democracy beyond projects: How users may achieve lasting influence on it systems. Interactions
     (New York) 23, 2 (2016), 36–39. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2889276
[55] Morten Kyng and Lars Mathiassen. 1980. Systems development and trade union activities. DAIMI Report Series 8, 99
     (1980). DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7146/dpb.v8i99.6515
[56] Megan Halpern Laura Forlano. 2016. Reimagining work: Entanglements and frictions around future of work nar-
     ratives. Fibreculture 26 (2016), 32–58. Retrieved from: http://twentysix.fibreculturejournal.org/fcj-189-reimagining-
     work-entanglements-and-frictions-around-future-of-work-narratives/.
[57] Christopher A., Le Dantec, and W. Keith Edwards. 2008. Designs on dignity: Perceptions of technology among the
     homeless. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’08). ACM, New York,
     NY, 627–636. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357155
[58] Thomas Ludwig, Alexander Boden, and Volkmar Pipek. 2017. 3D printers as sociable technologies: Taking appropri-
     ation infrastructures to the internet of things. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 24, 2 (April 2017),
     Article 17, 28 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3007205
[59] Mariana Mazzucato. 2014. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths (revised ed.). Anthem
     Press, London, UK. xxv + 237 pages.
[60] Chantal Mouffe. 2000. The Democratic Paradox. Verso. Retrieved from: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
     5rwu0FA9aO4C
[61] Kristen Nygaard and Olav-Terje Bergo. 1975. En Vurdering Av Styrings-og Informasjonssystemet KVPOL. Tiden Norsk
     Forlag.
[62] Kristen Nygaard and Olav-Terje Bergo. 1975. The trade unions-New users of research. Personnel Review 4, 2 (1975),
     5–10.
[63] Jens Pedersen. 2016. War and peace in codesign. CoDesign 12, 3 (2016), 171–184. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
     15710882.2015.1112813 arXiv:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2015.1112813
[64] Ove K. Pedersen. 2011. Konkurrencestaten. Hans Reitzels Forlag.
[65] Thomas Piketty and Arthur Goldhammer. 2017. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press. Re-
     trieved from: https://books.google.dk/books?id=dqEuDwAAQBAJ.
[66] Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf. 2009. Infrastructuring: Toward an integrated perspective on the design and use of
     information technology*. Journal of the Association for Information Systems 10, 5 (2009), 447–473. Retrieved from:
     http://search.proquest.com/docview/198832498?accountid=14468.
[67] Trebor Scholz. 2016. Uberworked and Underpaid : How Workers are Disrupting the Digital Economy. John Wiley & Sons,
     New York. Retrieved from: http://eu.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-074565357X.html.
[68] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson. 2012. Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design. Routledge.
[69] Adrian Smith and Ann Light. 2017. Cultivating sustainable developments with makerspaces. Liinc em Revista 13, 1
     (May 2017), 162–174. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.18617/liinc.v13i1.3900
[70] Rachel Charlotte Smith, Ole Sejer Iversen, and Mikkel Hjorth. 2015. Design thinking for digital fabrication in educa-
     tion. International Journal of Child-Compter Interaction 5, C (Sept. 2015), 20–28. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.
     2015.10.002
[71] Rachel Charlotte Smith, Ole Sejer Iversen, and Rune Veerasawmy. 2016. Impediments to digital fabrication in educa-
     tion: A study of teachers’ role in digital fabrication. International Journal of Digital Literacy and Digital Competence
     7, 1 (Jan. 2016), 33–49. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/IJDLDC.2016010103
[72] John Vines, Rachel Clarke, Peter Wright, John McCarthy, and Patrick Olivier. 2013. Configuring participation: On
     how we involve people in design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
     (CHI’13). ACM, New York, NY, 429–438. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470716
[73] Eric von Hippel. 2005. Democratizing Innovation. MIT Press. Retrieved from: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
     BvCvxqxYAuAC.
[74] Alex Voss, Mark Hartswood, Rob Procter, Mark Rouncefield, Roger S. Slack, and Monika Bscher. 2008. Configuring
     User-Designer Relations: Interdisciplinary Perspectives (1st ed.). Springer.
[75] Jon Whittle. 2014. How much participation is enough?: A comparison of six participatory design projects in terms
     of outcomes. In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers – Volume 1 (PDC’14). ACM,
     New York, NY, 121–130. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2661435.2661445



ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
Participatory Design that Matters                                                                                4:31

[76] Heike Winschiers-Theophilus, Nicola J. Bidwell, and Edwin Blake. 2012. Community consensus: Design beyond par-
     ticipation. Design Issues 28, 3 (2012), 89–100. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/DESI_a_00164
[77] Morten Kyng and Lars Mathiassen. 1982. Systems development and trade union activities. Information Society, For
     Richer, For Poorer, Niels Bjørn-Andersen (Ed.), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 247–60.
[78] Susanne Bødker. 2003. A for Alternatives. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 15, 1 (2003), Article 1.
[79] John Vines, Rachel Clark, Peter Wright, Ole Sejer Iversen, Tuck Wah Leong, John Mccarthy, and Patrick
     Olivier. 2012. SIG: Participation and HCI: Why involve people in design? Summary Report on CHI
     2012 invited. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267422196_Summary_Report_on_CHI_2012_invited_SIG_
     Participation_and_HCI_Why_Involve_People_in_Design.

Received January 2017; revised October 2017; accepted October 2017




           ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 25, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: February 2018.
