AI & Soc (1996) 10:51-57
© 1996 Sprlnger-VertagLondon Limited                               Ai & S O C I E T Y




Learning and Knowing with Artifacts: An Interview with
Donald A. SchSn
Thomas Binder

Donald Sch6n is professor emeritus and senior lecturer at the Department for Urban
Studies and Planning at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He has taken active
part in the debate about professional competence and professional education. In his
book: The reflective practitioner (Basic Books, 1983) he rejects the idea that
professions such as Architecture, Medicine or Law can be seen as applied sciences,
and argues in dispute with aoo. Herbert Simon that the professional constructs
competent action through engaging in conversation with a problematic situation.
He develops his core concepts of knowing-in-action and reflection-in-action further
in the book: Educating the reflective practitioner (Josey-Bass Publ., 1987). In this
book he delivers a strong argument for, why teaching is basically impossible. He
demonstrates through a number of case studies from architectural education how
coaching is the only workable approach to professional education, because learning
must always stem from the learner's personal encounter with the problems of the
profession. In dealing with the issue of learning with artifacts one of the very
interesting things about Donald SchOn's work is that he directly addresses the
question of how the individual engage with the physical world around him. I started
the interview by asking him if he could think of learning that takes place without
engagement with the physical world?

DONALD SCHON: It is very interesting to think of learning or thinking without
objects. For example, I often find it very important for me to be able to picture
things: to make diagrams to show relationships. When I think without objects, then
my impression is that I am trying to recreate in my mind the experience of having
them s011, as a kind of: holding them in my mind. So I w o u l d say that learning with
objects, if you include diagrams as objects, or pictures as objects, may be a kind of
prototype for learning without objects, since I seem to be trying to reproduce that
experience, when I am deprived of the things which I need to anchor my thoughts.
    Take this experience that the thought gets away from you - you can't hold onto
it? It's a very strange thing, because you are trying to control something which is
not quite controllable. Even if you could control it, you wouldn't want to control it
completely, because if you control it completely, you never get anything else than
 52                                                                                 T. Binder

 what you were using to control it with. I think the conversational metaphor is a good
 one for what's going on here. You want to let the object control you, in a way, at the
 same time as you're trying to control it. I think that's not unlike my experience with
thought. When I was much younger, I was very interested in invention, trying to
understand more about creativity and invention, and I was myself an inventor in a
small way. I worked with a group of technologists inventing products and I remember
paying attention to my wanderings and fantasies, and discovering that fantasy was
very important. Having fantasies of doing things often became the basis of suggesting
the directions that I would pursue, or other people would try to pursue.
    What I ' m fishing for, I think, is a certain kind of experience of being engaged
with something. To be making a diagram and paying attention to the diagram could
be an example. Playing a piano, when you're trying to learn a piece, that's also an
example. And so is trying to think something through when you don't have anything
to think with, an example. They're all examples of this process of engaging with
something, seeking to control what happens when you do so, but being unable to
control it, and not wanting to control it fully. Hence the power of the image of your
conversation with that 'something' came out: creating the diagram, engaging thoughts,
which you partly control and partly allow to control you .... leaving room for surprise,
and the metaphor of the conversation as knowing that what you are engaging has
"its own mind", seems here to me to be very powerful.


THOMAS BINDER: When we talk about things to think with or engaging with ob-
jects, someone could hear it as a purely cognitive issue. But is it not so that objects
in for example the educational setting actually transport or convey important aspects
of the competence that we are trying to acquire.


DONALD SCH¢)N: I have two thoughts in response to what you are saying. One is
that if you ask the question, "where is knowledge?", one answer is: it is in the
objects. In other words: where is your knowledge about how to operate that video
recorder? In your head? In your hands? It is when you actually touch it and position
it and look at it and move it that you get access to what you know. If I ' m typing, and
if you ask me the question, "Where is the T?" I may have a hard time telling you.
But if I ' m beginning to type, I go through the actions, I get access to the knowledge.
And ah... I get access to it in the sense that I could perhaps not have told you ahead
of time what I know. And if I think about a typewriter, that's a kind of discrete
object in front of me If I think about a setting, like this office or like this corridor, or
like MIT as a setting, then engaging with the object is more like engaging with the
environment. I know how to negotiate this environment, it's not strange to me.
Now, I remember, when I once spent a year in Israel, the strangeness of the place,
and my: not knowing how to negotiate it, and not having the sort of "unthinking
conscience" about how to deal with it, that was very troublesome. It took time. Six
months actually, for me to get to the place where this relationship with the setting
was evoking what I knew.
   That's one whole line of thought that comes out of your questions. If you ask:
how do we design artifacts to promote learning?, one starting point is to say, "How
do we understand the way people hold knowledge to begin with?".
 Learning and Knowing with Artifacts                                                    53

     The other line o f thought that your questions stimulate in me, is this issue of
  how learning happens as a result o f commerce with an artifact? And specifically,
  commerce with a computer program. I find that the people who write computer
  software with the aim of promoting learning have a peculiar blindness about what
  they do. For one thing, they tend to over-value their intentions. They tend to assume
  that the meaning of the object is what they intended it to be and that its capability
  of generating learning is what they take it to be. In Project Athena at MIT, we
  studied two programs that were called, Computer Aiding Teaching Systems. Both
  of them are based on the use of finite element methods, and both of them are related
  to statics and teaching statics.
     The one was seen by its designer as a teaching program. It was designed as an
 intelligent tool so that if you came to it, it would ask you a series of statics problems
 and if you didn't produce the right answers it would stop you and give you an
 explanation and ask you to do it again. The other program was not conceived as a
 teaching program at all, it was conceived as a design tool. You had a screen, you
 could draw a structure on the screen, like a truss or a bridge, and if you did, you
 could then specify what material it is made of, what are its dimensions and what is
 the loading? Then you could "load it" and you could observe it deflecting. You
 could also see shear diagrams, and all that would happen very quickly. You could
 re-design and iterate very quickly. The effect was that when we interviewed the
 students about these two programs, with the first programme - the so-called intelligent
 tutor - the effect was that the students here at MIT found it very boring, very dull,
 and they subverted it, so that instead of coaching them, it just gave out the fight
 answer. And then for the second program, which was not intended to be a teaching
 program, a third o f the students we interviewed, said that it showed how they really
 learned. For example, they would set up a structure like a bridge, they would load it
 and they would be surprised by what happened. Like they might say: it got stiffer
 when I took material away. H o w could that happen? How could it get stiffer when I
 removed something? And that would make them think about it and try to build
 hypotheses and test the hypotheses by redesigning the construction. One of the
 students said, "I took the basic static course, and I understood all the formulas, but I
never understood the structure, the behaviour of structures until I tried this" So, for
many students - about a third of those who interacted with the design tool - that
turned out to be an extremely educational program. It enabled them to get surprised
in terms of what they expected as they designed, and then to raise puzzles about the
phenomenon, and in order to resolve these puzzles, they had to re-think the meaning
of the formulas they had learned. And the program had not been designed to do that.
So it isn't so much a matter o f humility on the part of the designer, as blindness to
anything that falls outside of his intent.
      Another example, someone had designed - this was in Israel - a program to
make rooms. There were pieces of furniture. Each one had a sort of view of it in
plan and then you had to set that into the room, meeting certain criteria. It was seen
as educational, and what they were focusing on was how you went about the process
of solving the problem of design. You had to get all of these pieces in there, and the
space and the shape of the space constrained you, as to how you could do it. But
there were other issues in the program. For example, seeing the meaning o f certain
objects in plan. And seeing if that was a chair, or if this was a chair - the idea of
54                                                                                   T. Binder

looking at something represented in plan and seeing what it means in terms of the
object seen when you are face to face with it, turned out to pose a real difficulty for
the students.


T H O M A S B I N D E R : A difficulty so great that the application did not work?


D O N A L D SCH()N: For some. But for others the difficulty was great, but they could
overcome it, in other words, so that they could get to the place where they could
learn, that this is a chair. But that leaming was not included in what was build into
the software. The program was not seen as being about that. It was seen as being
about something else.


T H O M A S B I N D E R : And do you then think that it would have been worth while to
address that directly?


D O N A L D SCH(3N: What I think is that the software designer needed to take the
view that he didn't know what he had until he found out what they made of it. He
should have been interested in the question o f what do they make of m y s t u f f - and
he should have been aware that the object is not anything until the users make
something of it. W h a t ' s there depends on how the user calls it. The meanings
constructed by the user are the key things you need to worry about.


T H O M A S B I N D E R : But the programmes seem to make some kind o f educational
sense for you after all?


D O N A L D S C H O N : It makes some sense, but I think it is very important to try to
discover what sense it makes; and that is where this blindness that I thought I was
detecting among the designers seems to be. One of the things y o u ' r e doing, when
you think about the computer as creating an environment in which you could learn
to do something, is that you are saying that we are talking about the computer, or
especially the computer program, as an artifact. Y o u ' r e deliberately blurring the
distinction between the real world and the computer world. Y o u ' r e saying: that
representation o f a room is a room. That representation o f a chair is a chair. But it is
riot a chair. It is not a room. It is a representation of a chair. A representation of a
room. And therefore you have all of these issues about representation, both what
representations can capture and what they can't capture, and what it means to interact
with a representation vs. what it means to interact with the "real" stuff. That doesn't
mean to me that it's not a promising enterprise. It just points you in the line of
certain things to think about when you pursue the enterprise.
    Take the diagrams which I find so useful: You make a drawing [constructs a
diagram] and you say: well, here we are on this project, and we have these clients.
And here's the boss, and then we have these two engineers, and there's a marketing
person and he's a little bit further away, and here we are. Now, if we do that, we can
say, well, what kind o f a relationship do we have with him? But is it not important
Learning and Knowingwith Artifacts                                                     55

that this is the person who has a very strong linkage, and this one not? And if that's
true, what is our relationship with these people, and why are we ignoring him? So
the diagram immediately engages you with a set of relationships which it evokes
only because of its presence as marks on space.


THOMAS BINDER: And by taking that example, you're also saying that this issue
of representation is not a question of creating an illusion. When you point to the
diagram, you say that one of the important things is not that it creates an illusion.
The important thing is to acknowledge that it is a representation and to see what we
can get out of it.


DONALD SCHON: Yes, I think there are a lot of things you could say about that.
One of them is that it leaves almost everything out. There's almost nothing there,
which is why it's good, because then I can deal with it. Another thing is that just by
being in space - two-dimensional space, it has a kind of - you might say grammar,
you might say logic, or you might say, physical structure, as though it were a field
of forces. So that whether I wish to or not, certain ideas and questions come to mind.
For example, once I make these two things and I give them a referent, I say: that is
the box, this is us, we are entering into the post office, what is the nature of our
relationship? Okay, then this spatial relationship [between actors in the situation]
immediately comes up. You might then even say: Shouldn't we be closer? So that
the idea of the amount of distance is there, the spatial distance signifying some
social distance - it's all there. You don't have to invent it; it's there for you. So the
fact that he's over here, and there's some kind of an obstacle, some kind of a
boundary, a barrier between him and the rest, that idea of a barrier or boundary is
there. If you have a boundary, you also have a possibility of penetrating the boundary
or going around the boundary, that's also there. The size of these things, signifying
importance; what kind of importance is there? You see, everything is there the
moment you put your pencil to the paper. And that's extraordinary. Not only is
it all there. It will stay there. It is in time in the sense that I apprehend it in time.
But it stays there for me. I don't have to work to hold it steady. I have to work to
change it.


THOMAS BINDER: My last question concerns the process of designing artifacts
for learning. Do participatory design approaches in your view make sense here?


DONALD SCHON: Maybe the issue should rather be participation and conversation
and the difference between those things.


THOMAS BINDER: In what sense?


DONALD SCHON: The movement toward participatory design, I think, really did
have a Scandinavian origin. Or: It didn't have a Scandinavian origin, it had a
Scandinavian flowering after World War II, through the Tavistock Institute and in
 56                                                                              T. Binder

places like Norway where Einar Thorsrud' s work was important, as well as in Sweden.
And there, it had connotations of industrial democracy. It was definitely a political
act, maybe as I think about it now, as a reaction against the authoritarianism of the
fascist regimes. The notion of participatory design, or collective design, or co-design
says something about the formation of governments. It's a microcosm of the creation
of the state. You want to create a social world of designers, so you have all the
issues that a state has: Authority, how is it exercised; power, how is it contained;
control, how is it distributed; justice, how is it managed, how is it protected; goods,
how are they distributed; reward, who gets them; competence, where is it, how do
you find it - I mean, all of the issues that Plato's "Republic" presents are there in the
problem of managing participatory design. I think that helps to explain why most
participatory design exercises have not been of durable satisfaction.


THOMAS BINDER: But you mentioned earlier that the designers seemed not to be
paying enough attention to how the artifacts were actually used. Couldn't that call
for some kind of participatory process?


D O N A L D S C H O N : Well, I was trying to make a distinction b e t w e e n the
conversational approach to designing and the participatory approach to designing.
They are not the same. In other words, if you are designing a video camera, and
you are concerned with a lot of issues about how people will actually use it, what
it will mean to them, how they'll employ it, how the design of the artifact will
support or fight against the kind of uses that people will actually want to make
of that, what features are there that will be seen as precious or endearing or as
problematic or ugly - if you want to address those issues, you will need to be in
conversation with users. In conversation in the literal as well as the figurative sense
of the word conversation. You'll need to be understanding of what it means to
them, how they perceive it, what they do with it, how it fits in to their world - as
you say, how they appropriate it as part of that process, how they make sense of
it, how it is in their hand and what they think about it, and so on. You can get
that through conversation, including wordless conversation. You can get it by
observing what people will do with it and then thinking about what you observe -
perhaps feeding back what you observed; remaking, reworking your artifact per-
haps using rapid prototyping that enables you to rework in response to what you
think you are learning from going back to the people, who will be using it. This is
what I mean by conversational design. Participatory design is something else.
Participatory design says: Now you try to create a group. Maybe the group includes
those who will use the object. You want them to become designers. That means
you want control over design to be shared. You want design to be co-constructed
and co-managed.


THOMAS BINDER: And so, to my question: what is called for in the process of
designing artifacts for learning, you're saying that we definitely need a conversational
approach, and then you leave it open and say that, well, talking about participatory
design is in your view something beyond that.
Learning and Knowing with Artifacts                                          57

DONALD SCHCIN: Yes, it's well beyond that. And I think it poses a set of issues
whose depths goes beyOnd what the participatory designers were usually prepared
to cope with.
