7.1 Shared Responsibility: A Field of Tension
        Gro Bjerknes




7.1.1 Introduction

Why is it problematic for computer scientists and domain experts to share re-
sponsibility for a system development project, even when shared responsibility
is a goal for the project?
    I will discuss this topic on the basis of experiences from the Florence project l .
First, I present the Florence project and the organization of the project. Next, I
discuss 'shared responsibility'. Thirdly, I tell about three situations in which the
dilemma of shared responsibility was visible in some way or another, and finally,
I reflect upon our experiences.
    My conclusion is that shared responsibility, seen from a computer scientist's
point of view, turns out to be a field of tension between control of the project
on the one hand, and participation of domain experts on the other hand.



7.1.2 The Florence project

The Florence project was a research project about the development and use of
computer systems in nurses' daily work. The original goal of the project was
to design programming languages, called profession-oriented languages, based
on the professional language of occupational groups. The profession-oriented
languages were seen as an offensive strategy for occupational groups to keep
control over the use of computers in their work, instead of adjusting the work
to computer systems designed from a management point of view. Another hope
was to avoid adjusting work to computer systems designed for societies different
from the Norwegian one.
    The project adheres to a research tradition known as the collective resource
strategy2, or alternately as the critical tradition3 of system development in Scan-
dinavia. System development, in short, can be said to be concerned about how
to build computer systems that fit the organization in which it will be used.

1 The Florence project was initiated by the system development group, Dept. of In-
  formatics, University of Oslo, and sponsored by The Royal Norwegian Council for
  Scientific and Industrial Research. The project lasted from 1983 to 1987.
2 [Ehn and Kyng, 1987]
3 [Bansler, 1989]
     C. Floyd et al. (eds.), Software Development and Reality Construction
     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1992
296                                                                  Gro Bjerknes

Thus, two important topics are:

 1. What does a fit between a use organization and a computer system mean,
    and
 2. How do we carry out system development to ensure that the resulting com-
    puter system actually fits the use organization.

The critical tradition in Scandinavia has its its basis in the institutionalized
conflict between labour and capital. Hence, these topics have been discussed from
a worker's point of view, arguing that capital already had resources to develop
computer systems according to their needs. The trade unions were regarded
as representatives for the workers' collective, and the first projects within the
tradition were carried out in close cooperation with trade unions, aiming at
developing strategies for the introduction of computers. However, there are many
assumptions built into computer technology, and after a while it was considered
necessary to question the technology itself. This led to projects where the goal
was to show alternatives to existing technology. The Florence project was one
of these projects.
     Still, the goal of constructing profession-oriented languages was quite ab-
stract. We also found it difficult to construct a programming language on the
basis of natural (professional) languages. Therefore the goal was modified to
building a computer system for nurses' daily work. With this goal we could still
base our work on a profession, nursing, and we could explore different ways of
carrying out system development. In order to build computer systems for nurses'
daily work, we had two possibilities. We could do it all on our own, in which case
we would have to learn a lot about nursing. Or we could leave it to the nurses to
decide what kind of computer applications would suit their work. Then we had
to teach the nurses how to evaluate computer systems in relation to their work.
     According to the Scandinavian research tradition, we chose the latter and
became dependent on the nurses. If we say that the computer scientists repre-
sented a technical point of view, and the nurses a work setting point of view,
the idea was that the nurses should see the technical solution from a work set-
ting point of view. This view of the computer system should be the basis for
design. However, the nurses also became dependent on us, because we were able
to evaluate the work setting solutions from a technical point of view by adding
our general knowledge of the consequences of computerization.
     We wanted to reflect the mutual dependency in the organization of the
project, by sharing the responsibility for the project with the nurses. The mutual
dependency was reflected in the first period of the project, called 'mutual learn-
ing'. This period was inspired by anthropological research methods, introduced
by the anthropologist that participated in the project. The goal of these activ-
ities was that the computer scientists should learn about nursing, and that the
nurses should learn about informatics. The 'mutual learning' period ended with
negotiations about the application area of the computer system we intended to
build, evaluated on both a nursing and an informatical basis.
7.1 Shared Responsibility: A Field of Tension                                 297

7.1.3 The notion of 'shared responsibility'
The notion of 'shared responsibility' was seldomly explicitly stated in the Flo-
rence project, it was more like an implicit assumption that guided the planning
of the project and the way the project was carried out.
    The bases for the concept of shared responsibility are the following state-
ments:
 • There are different interests in a project, and the differences are a source of
   knowledge.
 • The different groups are equally necessary.
 • The responsibility for the project as a whole should be shared between the
   participants. To share responsibility means both to give and to take respon-
   sibility, according to the situation.
The first two statements can be seen as a political credo. The statements express
the importance of the domain experts, in this case nurses. The emphasis on
domain experts is closely related to the critical tradition in Scandinavian system
development research. The statements also stress the importance of computer
scientists. Together the statements express the view that even though domain
experts are experts on their own work, computer scientists can contribute to how
to build a computer system that fits the work. The third statement seems to be
a logical consequence of the first two. However, it proved to be very difficult to
share responsibility with the nurses. As the anthropologist in the project put it:
"Should the users decide on their own, or should they have democratic system
developers who decide for them?"


7.1.4 Three situations
The dilemma of shared responsibility was encountered in three situations:
 1. when we decided what computer system to build,
 2. when we had serious trouble due to bugs in the computer, and
 3. when the computer system was introduced in the work place.
   The dilemma appeared foremost in situations where the computer scientists
wanted to control the process for one reason or another, e.g. keeping the time
schedule, protecting research interests, and at the same time it was imperative
that the nurses had control as well, in order to reach the overall goal of the
project.
    In the first situation, the computer scientists wanted to build a computer
system that was interesting from a research point of view. On the other hand,
the system should also be a system the nurses wanted to use in their daily work,
otherwise there would be no research connected to the study of computer systems
muse.
    In the second situation, the computer scientists excluded the nurses from
the development process by giving priority to programming problems instead of
using at least some time to keep the nurses in a kind of busy-wait state.
298                                                                  Gro Bjerknes

    In the third situation, the computer scientists insisted on leaving the instruc-
tion and introduction of the computer system to the nurses. Again, we would
have liked to exercise a kind of control to ensure that the system was used.
However, we had no means to force the nurses to use the system.


Deciding on what computer system to build

We were determined to let the nurses decide what kind of computer applications
they wanted. This was mostly due to earlier experiences: it is hard to motivate
a sense of cooperation if the nurses do not judge the proposed computer system
to be useful for their daily work. We also would insist on building a computer
system for the nurses' daily work. We were not interested in making carbon
copies of general administrative or medical systems. And both groups wanted to
build a computer system that gave a fair chance to succeed with the available
resources.
    We decided on the computer system by setting up a negotiating meeting.
In the week before the meeting, we were rather nervous. Could we really trust
that the nurses had sufficient understanding of informatics to propose a use-
ful computer system? What should we do if there were a total disagreement?
Should we try to persuade them in some way or another? Should we set up new
negotiations? How should we do this?
    Fortunately, we did agree on a computer system. We decided to build a "work
sheet system" , i.e. the computer system should produce work sheets that were to
replace the clipboards that the nurses use during a shift. The clipboards contain
all relevant information about the patients in the ward, and they are used as
reminders and notepads during a shift. The work sheet system was a small and
simple system. At that time, we knew enough about nursing to recognize that
even if the computer system was simple, it would interfere with the nurses' daily
working routines and the information structures they used in many and complex
ways. Seen from a system development point of view, this was a challenge. And,
most important, we could rely on the nurses. Our anxiety to leave important
decisions to the nurses seemed to be unnecessary.
    So, we remained in peace with the nurses. Instead, the decision brought up
other conflicts with existing traditions:

 • We found ourselves in conflict with the assumptions of what researchers
   should do. Neither in a research milieu, represented by the financing institu-
   tions, nor in the technical milieu, represented by the computer manufacturer,
   is it acceptable to make simple and useful computer systems. Instead, the
   systems are supposed to be technically advanced, and result in new and fancy
   products. This is due to the fact that the (research) goal often is meant to
   support the development of new Norwegian information technology, which
   seems to be in opposition to building useful computer systems for particular
   users .
 • The computer system did not correspond to the usual way of using com-
   puters in hospitals. The usual way is to make computer systems for the
7.1 Shared Responsibility: A Field of Tension                                   299

   administration of goods, personnel and patients, to make medical systems
   for medical doctors or to make statistics for planning. Thus, our computer
   system represented a new way of looking at the use of information in hospi-
   tals. Unfortunately, this is difficult to explain to computer scientists, because
   they do not know anything about hospitals. And for people in health care,
   the system corresponded to the way they actually use information, therefore
   they could not see anything new in it. They could not see that the tradi-
   tional way of using computers in hospitals often is a mismatch with the way
   information actually is used .
 • Due to the deviation from tradition, another conflict was brought to the sur-
   face; namely, two opposing views on how to solve the problems in health care:
   One side prefers technical solutions, like computer-based medical records, the
   other side prefers organizational solutions. We were lucky since the larger
   part of our steering group belonged to the 'organizational' side.

This illustrates that we could rely on the nurses to share responsibility, but that
the consequences of shared responsibility are not necessarily accepted outside a
project.


Bugs in the computer

The project was behind schedule due to hardware errors, software errors and the
fact that we had to explore the limits of the computer tools we were using. During
the implementation, we worked at the University most of the time, for several
reasons: It was a half hour drive each way to the hospital; at the University we
had a workplace, with telephone available all the time, a black-board which we
used for planning and writing down design decisions, a proper place for manuals
and so forth; in the hospital we had one terminal only, and we always worked in
rooms that were designed according to the nurses' needs.
    What was the result of this? When we did not have the regular contact with
the nurses, they lost the possibility for taking responsibility for the project. We
excluded them from the process, even if we did not intend to do so. We just
thought that they were not interested in programming and debugging. What
happened was that they lost motivation; they could not understand why things
took so long. They had seen a prototype made with a text-editor, and they could
not understand why it took us such a long time to implement the system; nothing
seemed to happen in the project. Thus, it was difficult for them to legitimize the
project to the other nurses in the ward. The result was almost a total collapse
of the project. We rescued it at the last minute.
    This illustrates how easy it is to exclude people from taking responsibility
even when the goal is the opposite.


Introduction of the computer system

After teaching the members of the project group how to use the system and
making short, written instructions, the responsibility for instruction and intro-
300                                                                        Gro Bjerknes

duction of the computer system was completely left to the nurses. Then we left,
and we did not show up for half a year.
    Since the nurses have been responsible for the suggestion of a useful com-
puter system, it was rather easy for us to let them take the responsibility for
introducing and using it. After all, it was not necessary for us to prove to the
nurses that the computer system was useful to them.
    In the beginning, the nurses were a bit reluctant, and could not believe that
we really meant to leave them on their own with the system. But when they
got used to the idea, it worked fine. As a matter of fact, their way of organizing
instruction was much better than anything we would have proposed. One reason
for this was that they exploited the existing organization of work.
    The nurses are divided into kernel groups that work the same shift. So the
instruction was based on a two-step strategy: One person from every kernel group
should learn to use the system, and they should teach the two other nurses in
their group when time allowed for it. The nurses were also able to exploit the
differences in workload between night and day. So they practised a lot during the
night and evening shifts. Where we only saw constraints, they saw possibilities.
    This illustrates that the results may be better when we dare to hand over
responsibility to others. Still, it was tempting to control the nurses and in this
way keep the responsibility for the process, especially when things were going
slowly.


7.1.5 An attempt at an explanation

In principle, shared responsibility means both giving and taking responsibility.
We found that it was difficult for us to give responsibility. Somehow, we felt that
it was easy for us to take responsibility, and that responsibility was easily given
to us.
     One could ask, why was it important to share responsibility with the nurses
if it was so difficult? In belated wisdom, we would say that the notion of 'shared
responsibility' was our solution to the field of tension 4 between control and a
participative process.
     It seems that computer scientists like to have control 5 . However, it is not
only computer scientists themselves who expect to control system development;
others expect this as well. 'Control' in this setting means that the computer
scientists often are in charge of both the computer system and the process of
building it. This can prevent user participation in several areas.

    • When computer scientists are building a computer system, they want the
      result to fulfill some quality criteria. To reach the desired level of use quality

4 'Field of tension' is a concept which is inspired by Mao Tsetung's concept of con-
  tradictions [Tsetung, 1967]. I have chosen the concept of 'fields of tension' because I
  like the intuitive meaning of this notion.
5 Cf. Burstall, Chap. 2.3.
7.1 Shared Responsibility: A Field of Tension                                         301

      the domain experts6 must participate in the process7 . On the other hand,
      the domain experts' knowledge does not guarantee a computer system with
      good use quality. This is the reason why both kinds of expertise are necessary
      in system developments. The need for both kinds of expertise creates uncer-
      tainty. It seems impossible to determine whether the domain experts have a
      sufficient background for evaluating a computer system for their own work,
      and it seems equally impossible for computer scientists to know in advance
      whether they will have sufficient knowledge about the application area to
      evaluate the domain experts' suggestions for computer systems. It is quite
      tempting for computer scientists to reduce this uncertainty by controlling
      and dominating the system development process. In fact, it is quite hard not
      to dominate it .
    • Even if the computer scientists are responsible for the process, it is possible
      to delegate well defined tasks, like education. Since they are often supposed
      to be responsible for the overall time schedule, it can be difficult not to
      intervene if the activity does not proceed as scheduled. In this way, the
      feeling of control may destroy the involvement of domain experts, because it
      is somehow contradictory to delegate the responsibility for a task and then
      control the people who carry it out .
    • The computer scientists also have to design and implement the computer
      system. Of course they have their own time schedules for those tasks. Often
      they think that the problem to be solved and the specified requirements are
      well defined, and they do not expect that they will need the domain experts
      after this point in time. First, it often proves to be wrong that everything
      was well understood 9 • Second, the computer scientists do not give prior-
      ity to keeping in touch with the domain experts due to time constraints. If
      they have to choose between implementing a specification according to time
      schedule or to contact the domain experts to confirm that the specification
      is correct from the domain experts' point of view, the computer scientists
      usually choose to keep the time schedule. In this way, the efforts of the com-
      puter scientists to control their own tasks may prevent the domain experts
      from participation in the process.
In theory, shared responsibility is the field of tension between the computer
scientists' and the domain experts' control of the development process. In reality,
however, much control is given to or taken by computer scientists. Thus, shared
responsibility will be a field of tension for computer scientists between control
and participation of domain experts.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Reinhard Keil-Slawik for his constructive comments on this
chapter.

6 I use the notion 'domain expert' instead of 'user', since the notion of 'user' pinpoints
  that the most important aspects of people's work is that they use a computer system.
1 [Rolskov, 1990]
8 [Bjerknes and Bratteteig, 1988]
9 [Florence Report, 1985, Sieker and Jensen, 1988]
