                                                                                                           2
                                                                                    Heritage
                                                                                Having a say

                                                          Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum




   This chapter focuses on the early history of Participatory Design projects up to the ﬁrst Participatory
   Design Conference in 1990. It explains how the political and social movements of the 1970s and 80s
   formed a stage for translating participatory research into development of computer applications. Some
   of the early action projects are described in order to give readers an understanding of the problems
   and challenges. A central focus is on the roots of Participatory Design in enabling workers to gain a
   voice in the technologies that aﬀect their working lives. It concludes with reviewing theoretical
   underpinnings as well as summarising some guiding principles.
      The Introduction focuses on the motivations and struggles in early work-oriented design. The general
   political context is described in order to situate the early projects in the complexity of enabling
   workers to gain a voice in decision-making about technology. Both action-based projects and
   theoretical sources are used to explain the development of Participatory Design’s guiding principles.
      Readers will learn about the early struggles to give voice to those who traditionally lack power
   in the development process. Equalising power relations and mutual learning are both a motivation
   and an outcome of the Participatory Design heritage. Of equal importance is the understanding that
   design and development must be situated in the real, everyday actions of people using technology.
   The early history is not intended as a ‘birth story’ but rather as a series of struggles that grew out of
   some mistakes and into new ways of looking at computer system development, traces of which can
   be seen today in many design situations.
      The early heritage demonstrates how diﬃcult it is to do more than ‘involve’ users in design.
   Bringing about more equal power relations and actually fostering emancipatory participation
   remains a critical challenge. The projects discussed here each begin with motivating factors and
   conclude with lessons learned and the need for further research. Participatory Design history tells us
   that mistakes and unanswered questions still abound.




Introduction
The roots of Participatory Design are deep and broad. We begin here in the 1970s when
progressive ideas spread from the society at large into emerging computer system development in


                                                                                                               21
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


the workplace. This early heritage is intriguing in many ways because the seeds of later parti-
cipatory approaches have inherited some of the victories of earlier projects as well as some of the
continuing challenges.
   This chapter lays out some of the struggles in the history of the now maturing – after more
than four decades of growth – ﬁeld of Participatory Design. We discuss some of the lessons
learned in the 1970s and 1980s as we address the following questions: What motivated initial
projects for choosing a Participatory Design approach? What was in fact designed? How may
the heritage be conceptualised? What does the heritage have to oﬀer to those who strive to
apply Participatory Design inspired approaches today? Our focus is on Participatory Design
action projects where the needs of groups of workers drove researchers to take note of how
previously unheard voices could be important in design of technologies. These early projects are
discussed within the political context of the 1960s, 70s and 80s, a cold war environment that
gave rise to the importance of strong voices speaking out on social issues that aﬀected groups
with access to fewer resources. The chapter takes us up to the ﬁrst Participatory Design Con-
ference in 1990, where the ideas and practices in the early period began to be pulled together
into a coherent set of principles. The following chapters will cover later developments within
Participatory Design.
   We start in Scandinavia in the 1970s with some exemplary cases of projects with what was
then known as data processing. In some ways it is no surprise that the heritage discussed here
starts in places where trade unions and collective bargaining were strong and able to inﬂuence
power relations in the workplace. These cases involved trade union activists who sought ways to
inﬂuence the fast-paced automation that was emerging on their shop ﬂoor. The early trade
union work set out to ask systems researchers as ‘experts’ to help them better cope with
workplace problems – and indeed Participatory Design helped the workers do this, but it also ﬂipped
the project on its ear by introducing the system designers to a whole new set of problems.
   We then proceed with a short introduction to another strong inspiration for Participatory
Design – ethnographic studies about the introduction of technology into workplaces. These
types of studies gave voice to oﬃce workers and technicians as they experienced the con-
sequences of workplace change. Chapter 5 gives more detail about the ethnographic
approach.
   Finally, the chapter provides an overview of some of the main theoretical roots of participation;
a topic that will be further explored in Chapter 3. The more speciﬁc principles, practices and
techniques that Participatory Design has provided may be – and have indeed been – used for
other purposes and with other intentions. Understanding and appreciating the theoretical roots
of participation are seen as necessary for obtaining what this chapter will begin to describe
as genuine participation. And we conclude with some principles we feel are instrumental for
carrying out contemporary, genuine and action-based Participatory Design.
   While this book describes concepts and practices aﬀecting tools that are applied now to a wide
range of digital artefacts – going well beyond the workplace – this chapter focuses on the work-
oriented heritage of this ﬁeld. But the lessons learned bear repeating, as without history we are often
left to repeat some of the same mistakes – and as we know too well, the challenges of
multi-party participation combined with constantly changing technologies are fertile ground
for making mistakes! The participatory perspective we introduce here brings those issues back up to
the surface.
   The need for participation, in essence, recognises that tensions exist between those with some
form of knowledge and power and those without. Kensing (1983) argues that basic require-
ments for genuine participation include access to information, resources (time, money and
expert assistance) and the power to inﬂuence decisions. In an extensive review of

22
                                                                                              Heritage


Participatory Design projects, Clement and van den Besselaar (1993) suggest further that
appropriate participatory development methods and organisational and technical ﬂexibility are
also needed.


Political context
What came to be known as Participatory Design started as a reaction to changes in society at
large, rooted in local communities as well as in workplaces. In Germany and Austria, for example,
where some community groups were experimenting with ways to actively involve citizens in
local issues, a new type of process, called a ‘Future Workshop’, engaged citizens in important
issues (see Jungk and Müllert 1987). In the US, where burning social issues such as civil rights and
urban problems needed to be addressed through grass-roots action, Participatory Action Research
(PAR) began to gain serious hold in the research and public sector communities (see Whyte
1991). Also in the US, the war in Vietnam propelled activists to examine technology through
groups such as Computer People for Peace and, later, Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility (CPSR), which became involved in key inﬂuencing political policies around
technology issues, and which sponsored the Participatory Design conferences from the very start.
In England the path-breaking socio-technical approach, among other activities, evolved to
directly confront the fact that technology had social and political roots (Mumford 1972). The
socio-technical approach spread well beyond England and was, in fact, used widely in Scandi-
navia among employers’ associations.
    Within the ﬁeld of computer science the times and tensions were also reﬂected through the lens
of professional organisations. Until the later 1980s, most computer programs were custom designed
for huge mainframe computers; there were no generic applications to re-apply to different
companies or situations. Systems analysis and design – the process of developing mainframe com-
puter systems – was strongly inﬂuenced by management principles that controlled the ﬂow of
how programs were designed. Classic textbooks on design (e.g. Yourdon 1982; Demarco 1979)
advocated a ‘waterfall model’ where problems were deﬁned by management with no input from those
who would be using the system. In the early 1980s as micro-computers (precursors to mini and
desktop computing) began to emerge, the concept of ‘users’ began to emerge. Human–Computer
Interaction, and its professional association Computer Human Interaction (CHI), focused on how
then-emerging interfaces could be designed for presumed ‘users’. Computer Human Interaction,
however, borrowed the cognitive assumption from earlier computer system design, establishing a
set of procedures that stemmed from how designers thought users might think. From a participa-
tory perspective, this cognitive approach is considered a central fallacy in that it assumes that indi-
vidual users’ thoughts could be transcribed into programmed interfaces and applications. Even
when users were invited to laboratories to test out interface designs, the focus was on ‘capturing’
user eye movement or keystrokes, rather than actually involving the users in the context of their own
work. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), a professional conference group,
distanced itself from the single-user cognitive approach, focusing instead on the social and
cooperative nature of work. CSCW’s origins coincided with the beginning of network and dis-
tributed systems in the late 1980s as it introduced ethnographic and social science analysis into
computer system design. But CSCW also had a central fallacy to many who moved into what
later became Participatory Design: namely, the focus levelled work and workers with management and
failed to examine the political nature of work and its power relations. The CSCW conference of 1988
gave birth to a sub-group that was concerned with the conﬂicting and politically sensitive issues
of workers and their muted voices. This sub-group created the ﬁrst Participatory Design Conference
in 1990, joining forces with CSCW colleagues, yet giving voice to the politics behind all design.

                                                                                                    23
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


Early action projects
The action-based stories in this chapter begin in Norway, where workers in the Iron and Metal
union teamed up with Kristen Nygaard, a computer scientist, and Olav Terje Bergo, an econ-
omist, from the Norwegian Computing Centre (Norsk Regnesentral) in order to have a say at
the bargaining table about how computers should be introduced at the workplace.
   Kristen Nygaard, who pioneered this stream of work in Norway in the early 1970s, referred
to it as a ‘knowledge strategy’ for trade unions (Nygaard and Bergo 1975a). Nygaard, an early
developer of what is considered the ﬁrst object-oriented computer language,1 stressed that in
order to have a say in relation to the ways in which technology is introduced at the workplace,
workers and their organisations have to build up a ‘knowledge base’ to draw on when they met
with management. While unions had the right to bargain about wages and working conditions,
the idea of having the right to bargain about the type of technology-mediated change brought
into the workplace was very radical for its time. Yet, as we shall see, the knowledge-base strategies
worked up to a point. Nygaard and the unions soon found that other forces came into play.
   Out of these early experiences grew three types of projects that tried to take workplace actions
and workers seriously; each addressed concerns that didn’t have clear problem deﬁnitions or
methods for solving them, and each brought forth new lessons for new problems that still need
to be attacked. The ﬁrst we call Knowledge Strategy projects, which began to unravel the very
unequal balance between workers, who knew little about technology, with system developers
who, like designers today, spoke in a language that was hard for the workers to understand and relate
to. The second set of early projects are called Design and Intervention projects where, building
on and expanding the knowledge base of workers, the concern was to show, by concrete
examples, that there are technological alternatives, and that those alternatives reﬂect diﬀerent
starting values. Indeed, this is very much the case with social networking and communication
design situations now: the clear need to demonstrate alternative visions. The third type of pro-
jects involved ethnographic analyses of relations between work, workers and technology. As a
reaction to the decontextualised studies of such relations that were most common at the time,
American anthropologists, who were aﬃliated with the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
(located in Silicon Valley, California), applied their skills in the interest of understanding a new
domain. Today various versions of ethnographically informed analysis have found their way –
with or without anthropologists – to the design of many diﬀerent kinds of technologies.


Knowledge strategy projects
The idea of involving workers in decisions about technology didn’t suddenly spring out of the air;
two signiﬁcant management and political situations acted as triggers. One factor, not unique to
Scandinavia, was the widespread use of management strategies to divide and conquer workers’ power by
automating tasks and de-skilling workers. For an elaborate discussion of such issues see Greenbaum
(1975) and Sandberg (1979). These management actions, while having precursors at the turn of the
twentieth century in Scientiﬁc Management, sought to standardise and simplify work tasks in
order to create interchangeable workers as well as interchangeable manufactured parts. Standardisation
and simpliﬁcation were intended to lower wages and better control the workforce (see Greenbaum
1979). Charlie Chaplin’s ﬁlm Modern Times (from 1936) illustrates the outrageous eﬀects on
workers whose skill is removed and inserted into automated equipment. The process of de-skilling
workers can still be seen in jobs such as those in call centres, where work practices are standardised to
reduce labour costs and ﬁt into computerised routines. The Norwegian Iron and Metal workers
were experiencing this as Nygaard and Bergo began working with them in the early 1970s.


24
                                                                                           Heritage


   The second factor was indeed unique to Scandinavia, where legislation and workplace agreements
had been written in the late 1960s and through the 70s allowing workers the right to infor-
mation and some degree of co-determination over the conditions of their work. The limitations
in these arrangements, however, were contested in the knowledge strategy projects described
here, where workers often had to ﬁght for information about management’s technology plans.
   The Norwegian NJMF2 project from 1970 to 1973 (Nygaard and Bergo 1975a, 1975b), the
Swedish DEMOS3 project from 1975 to 1980 (Ehn and Sandberg 1983; Ehn 1988) and the
Danish DUE4 project from 1977 to 1980 (Kensing 1981; Jacobsen et al. 1981; Kyng and
Mathiassen 1982) were based on similar concerns. While we discuss lessons learned from all
these projects, we have chosen to give a detailed account of the rationale and activities of only
one of these, the NJMF project, as it became an inspiration for later work.
   In these early projects workers and researchers analysed the speciﬁc problems with new technology
at the workplace and developed strategies to boost workers’ power in relation to management’s
technology initiatives. The projects were carried out as action research and were organised as a
reaction to workers’ experiences from a vast number of co-determination experiments carried
out cooperatively between the employers’ federation and the labour movements in each of the
Scandinavian countries. In the Danish case, for instance, workers reported that these experi-
ments stopped before any substantial changes towards real inﬂuence had been achieved, and
workers were reluctant to press for more inﬂuence for fear of reprisals (Tjørnehøj 1976; Ehn
and Kyng 1987). These experiments were inspired by socio-technical research at the Tavistock
Institute in England (see e.g. Trist et al. 1963; Trist 1981; Mumford 1983).
   The English projects were rooted in the path-breaking notion that technology was a result of
a social and political process, and therefore attention to technical design was embedded in all
levels of discourse from the shop ﬂoor through political action. Since the early 1970s, Mumford
and associates had worked on a socio-technical approach (see Mumford 1972, 1993a, 1993b;
Mumford et al. 1978) advocating development of the social and technical systems more or less
parallel to each other. This approach strove for eﬃcient use of technology and increased job
satisfaction for the intended users. The approach was heavily critiqued by Scandinavian
researchers involved in trade union projects in the mid to late 1970s. The critique was twofold
(Ehn and Sandberg 1979; Kyng and Mathiassen 1982). From an ideological point of view, the
approach to workers’ participation was evaluated as too narrow, because workers were mainly
participating as informants in a process dominated by managers and their specialists. Further, the
proposed techniques for decision-making in projects were evaluated as naïve, because they
suggested that decisions should be taken by voting, thus not reﬂecting the distribution of power
at the workplace. However, the socio-technical approach should be acknowledged for insisting
on a focus on organisational as well as technical issues, and also for introducing prototyping as
early as 1978 (Mumford et al. 1978, p. 250).


The Iron and Metal project
The Iron and Metal project started as workers realised that their deteriorating working process
involved dislocation, de-skilling and less inﬂuence on their own working conditions. Addi-
tionally they saw the need to push co-determination rights to include the right to information
about technology (see Nygaard and Bergo 1975a).
   Nygaard and Bergo (1975b) report on an important lesson they learned at the very beginning
of the project, and one that pops up again and again: namely, that the best-laid plans are not the
way the project will end up! So though plans are helpful resources for action (Suchman 1987)
in complex situations, participatory designers need to be prepared to alter plans as they learn

                                                                                                 25
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


more about the situation and the context. When the Iron and Metal project began, there had
been very few projects that had taken the interests of trade unions as their starting point, so there
was little experience to build on. Initially, Nygaard and Bergo describe that they had planned
the project in a rather traditional way, without the active participation of the workers, relying
instead on the researchers to conduct the analysis. This comprised:


! mapping the goals and interests of the workers and their union;
! analysing three other management systems used in Norway, showing how the purpose
  and mechanisms inscribed in these systems aﬀected the interests of the workers and their
  union;
! formulating workers’ requirements for these systems;
! analysing the trade union’s earlier experience with building competences;
! analysing which competencies were needed in relation to information technology and
  management.


In the initial plan these activities were to be carried out by the researchers, while workers and the
union were to be involved mainly through interviews.
   The reaction from trade unionists was that it would be interesting to see the results, but that
they couldn’t see any practical relevance. How were the workers supposed to make use of the
knowledge produced? The two researchers then realised that they were in the process of pro-
ducing reports that would end up unread on the bookshelves in the trade union hall. The
results they were about to produce did not ﬁt into the reality of the workers’ lives; they could
not use the knowledge developed as a resource for action.
   In order to ﬁll this gap, Nygaard and Bergo got together with the workers and their union
and began to apply action research practices in order to build technical and organisational
knowledge for the workers to use in negotiations with employers and their management
experts. Action research, an important component of Participatory Design, seeks to engage both
the aﬀected workers and the outside researchers in studying and remedying existing problems
(Greenwood and Levin 1998).
   Nygaard and Bergo describe the rationale for the new research design, involving action
research, in the following way:


! The purpose is to develop new knowledge geared towards the workers’ ability to take
  action to increase their say over the ways in which the computer systems are introduced at
  the workplace.
! Actions for change require that the goals are discussed (and shared) among the workers, and
  that the actions are part of a plan.
! Results of the research are not reports and papers, but all actions taken by workers, at
  the local or the central level, that are based on the research project, and that intend
  to increase the inﬂuence of workers on information technology and management in the
  companies.
! Therefore reports and papers are useful only if they lead to such actions among workers.


Thus, the project had a triple focus on what Wagner and Gärtner (1996) later called Arenas A, B and
C: namely the individual project arena (A), the company arena (B) and the national arena (C).
  Based on such a rationale, the new research design had the following elements:

26
                                                                                           Heritage


! A strategy report focusing on actions that would call for new knowledge
! Iterative development of teaching materials
! A working process: at the four participating companies 20–30 workers in smaller groups met
  every other week for a few hours to discuss problems with computer systems and manage-
  ment – and how to deal with such problems. The researchers functioned as lecturers and
  consultants and sometimes as students, as they realised they had much to learn about how
  mainframe management systems worked in practice. The groups then produced reports that
  were primarily written by the workers.

While the ﬁrst research design was oriented towards analysis and proposals made by the researchers,
the second research design focused on establishing a learning cycle within the union, where actions
for change generated needs for new knowledge, which furthered new actions. And the workers involved
found their own voice and technical vocabulary to use in negotiations with management.
   And here, through the ﬁrst mistakes, we ﬁnd a key argument for what is now called Parti-
cipatory Design. Literature in the ﬁeld commonly bases the need for participation on several
arguments. One, a political argument, emphasises that people should have the right to inﬂuence
their working conditions. Another central argument is pragmatic. Its focus is that in the process
of involving people who will be aﬀected as active participants, learning will take place between
the ‘experts’ and the participants which can result in better designs. And as we will see, this
process of learning between and among the diﬀerent power groups came to be known as
‘mutual learning’, a cornerstone of Participatory Design.
   For Nygaard and Bergo it was both arguments and at the same time – not one without the
other. It is through participation that new ideas and knowledge would be produced or sought
for, and this was part of the process for standing up for one’s rights. The project showed that
rights were not something given by those in power – rather, rights were something workers had
to ﬁght for through knowledge-based negotiations.


Voicing participation
In this way, what we call genuine participation as practised by proponents of Participatory Design
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from participation as seen by other traditions such as user-centred design,
contextual design and user-driven innovation (Norman and Draper 1986; Beyer and Holtzblatt
1998), and other approaches that oﬀer some form of ‘user empowerment’, which have become
more ‘mainstream’ today. While Participatory Design diﬀerentiates itself from these other
approaches we place the practice within a spectrum of ways that prospective users of a technology
can get involved. However, Participatory Design as an emancipatory approach has little regard for
approaches that solely involve users as informants through interviews, focus groups or other one-
way techniques in a process otherwise controlled by information technology designers and their
clients/managers. Such one-way data-gathering approaches we do not consider to be genuine
participation.
    In addition to the local achievements obtained by active participation of union members, the
early Scandinavian projects also contributed with other types of results that should be brieﬂy
mentioned. For instance, the Scandinavian researchers reacted against the idea that technology
at the workplace should take place solely under the co-determination agreements that were in
place in their countries. Instead, in the Swedish DEMOS project, Ehn and Sandberg (1979)
proposed that introduction of technology at the workplace should be based on negotiation
within collective bargaining rights, just as wages and working conditions are negotiated.
Second, and perhaps more signiﬁcantly in terms of lasting eﬀect, the Iron and Metal project was

                                                                                                 27
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


the basis for the formulation of the Norwegian technology agreement signed by the trade
unions and the employers’ federation in 1975 (see Ciborra and Schneider 1983; Mathiassen et
al. 1983). Third, many tools and techniques that have been developed within Participatory
Design (see, for example, Kensing and Blomberg 1998, and also Chapter 7 of this volume) have
been adopted by other approaches, although more often than not without the emancipatory
rationale upon which Participatory Design approaches are founded. Fourth, another long-lasting
result came from the Danish DUE project. For more than a decade, up to ten one-week
technology courses for trade unionists were organised by the researchers, who had also devel-
oped the teaching materials (Kyng and Mathiassen 1982). Finally, the researchers also developed
new university courses on technology analysis and design based on their experiences with the
trade unions. Such courses, in updated versions, are still oﬀered at bachelor’s and master’s levels.
Further, master’s and PhD theses were produced and contributed to building an additional
branch of computer science and information systems called Human–Computer Interaction and
Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
   Not all issues were dealt with in these early projects. Indeed, the Iron and Metal workers did
not end up implementing any new technology; rather, the outcome was a new process. The
most apparent missing link was probably the idea that in order for workers to gain real inﬂuence
on technology at their workplace, new technologies have to be designed based on workers’
interests and values. This became a key issue in the subsequent projects.


Design and intervention projects
The knowledge strategy projects began to nibble away at the problem of how workers could
learn more about computers and how the systems designers/researchers could learn more about
what workers really needed in the workplace. But then came the problem that if workers really
got involved – not just as users but as participants – would the design of alternative systems be
diﬀerent? The answer, as we will see, is still part of an ongoing conundrum, lurking today at the
heart of designing truly new tools and applications.
   While participants in the earlier projects did not engage themselves directly in the design and
implementation of new information technology applications, this became the focal point of
later strategies like UTOPIA (1981–4) and Florence (1984–7) and many subsequent projects.
The rationale for this was that while experience from the early projects had shown that strong
unions may increase the workers’ inﬂuence on technology, this was a necessary but not a suf-
ﬁcient condition for real changes to take place. It appeared to be necessary to create alternative
technologies as well as to ﬁght vendors’ monopoly over technological choices.
   The UTOPIA project was carried out by computer and social science researchers at the
Swedish Centre for Working Life, the Royal Institute of Technology, also in Sweden, and
Aarhus University in Denmark. The project cooperated with a supplier Liber/TIPS and a
Swedish and a Danish newspaper. It focused on typographical issues such as page make-up and
image processing in the newspaper industry. The goals of the UTOPIA project were to develop
technology for graphical workers that contributed to high-quality newsprint products, skilled
work and a democratic organisation of work, goals that sharply contrasted with the management-
driven objective of de-skilling workers (Ehn and Kyng 1984; Bødker et al. 1987; Ehn 1988).
The project aimed at creating technological alternatives with an involved trade union based on
their interests and concerns. The researchers set up a technology laboratory, in which trade
union representatives participated as skilled workers in prototyping technology for page make-
up and image processing. For the workers, control over their work process and the quality of
work and results were paramount issues.

28
                                                                                           Heritage


   The motivation for engaging in alternative technology production was that the knowledge
strategy projects of the 1970s in Norway (Iron and Metal), Sweden (DEMOS) and Denmark
(DUE) had realised that existing production technology more and more often constitutes an
insurmountable barrier preventing the realisation of trade union demands for the quality of
work and a meaningful job (Bødker et al. 1987). Further, the rationale was that it could be
more realistic to try to develop technology applicable for a whole industry rather than local
unions formulating alternatives for each of their employers to implement. The project therefore
set out to produce a ‘demonstration example’, showing that trade union development of
technology would be a feasible strategy (ibid.).
   The idea of cooperating with the technology companies and the newspapers aimed to bring
the research prototypes closer to commercially viable products that could be tested in real-life
situations. However, it turned out, not too surprisingly, that management and even the funding
research agency were not interested in the changes in work organisation and training that the
research project had crafted. Further, the journalists’ union also lost interest in the idea as they
began to pursue other interests – an issue that occurs all too frequently in participatory projects,
as workers and community groups also have other things to do (Ehn 1988). As a result, the
prototypes were never turned into commercial products. Interestingly, the problems of vendor
monopoly and worker or user lack of interest still loom large in the challenges facing
participatory practitioners.
   However, through the technology laboratory, the UTOPIA project went one step further than
the earlier work: it brought workers out of their workplace into a joint space where they could
freely experiment and imagine the types of digital tools they might need. This was long before
prototyping and oﬀ-the-shelf applications were common, and so it was diﬃcult to help spark
people’s imagination of future alternatives. Even now, with all the building blocks of interface
designs, applications and social networking software, the problem of imagining alternative solu-
tions still rears its head. The UTOPIA project’s concept of setting up laboratory-like settings
where designers/researchers and prospective users could work together to mock-up or proto-
type new technologies and new ways of working, is one of the lessons that still stay with us.
Further, the UTOPIA project developed and designed new ways of looking at future possibilities
that inspired and inﬂuenced Participatory Design methods (see Chapter 6) and Participatory
Design tools and techniques (see Chapter 7).
   The Florence project was another example of a research project with design and intervention
strategies. Unlike the UTOPIA research, though, it brought the focus directly back into the
workplace (Bjerknes and Bratteteig 1987, 1988). A motivation for the project was to build
computer systems for nurses’ daily work, focusing on communication and the professional lan-
guage and skills of nurses in order for them to gain control over the computer systems and their
own working conditions. And a central idea was that technological solutions should be tested in
real work situations. Florence was also carried out by researchers and workers, this time nurses
at two hospitals in Oslo, Norway, and two computer scientists and an anthropologist from the
university, although in this case the union was not a partner.
   As with earlier projects, Florence focused on workers whose voices were rarely heard, and
feminist concepts from the period were an important inﬂuence, particularly in relation to
fostering an environment where nurses felt comfortable to speak out about what was important
in their work. While the project did not involve unions it did actively engage nurses who saw
their work through the eyes of their patients, rather than through the lens of doctors’ orders or
computerised procedures.
   The project made a prototype based on the existing paper-based ‘kardex’ – the nurses’
equivalent to the physicians’ medical record. Reﬂecting on the ﬁnal evaluation meeting, the

                                                                                                 29
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


researchers note (Bjerknes and Bratteteig 1988) that while the nurses used the system, it was not
easy to grasp how the system actually ﬁtted their work. Developing an understanding of the
way work gets done and listening to the voices of the actual people in the ﬁeld remain key
lessons that still live on with Participatory Design today – lessons that continue to present an
enormous challenge in the national and international development of medical records systems.
   The Florence project was among the pioneers – for the purpose of designing new computer
applications – in applying observations of real work situations in combination with more
detached techniques such as interviews and workshops. Inspiration for this came from, and
overlapped with the work of, American anthropologists, as we shall see in the next section.
   While the motivation for Florence was to help the nurses give voice to their concerns at
work, a strict workplace orientation on the nursing profession was diﬃcult to maintain; other
occupational groups, like physicians and nursing assistants, wanted to be considered as well. This
is a problem that remains today as diﬀerent groups or stakeholders within an organisation may
have conﬂicting power relations and thus diﬀering views about what activities an application
should support. There are no easy ﬁxes for this problem, but as we will see in the concluding
part of this chapter and in subsequent chapters, there are principles and tools and techniques that
help groups speak for themselves.


Ethnographic analysis of relations between work and technology
Another important part of the Participatory Design heritage is the inﬂuence of the work practice
and technology research area at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) on early
explorations of the role of ethnography in Participatory Design. Anthropologists at PARC were
involved in studies of the relations between people, technology and work in the service sector in
the US. They performed detailed analyses of the ways work gets done, the in situ rationales that
workers apply, and the technologies and other resources they bring to bear. They were able to
show how new technologies, when introduced into the workplace, shape the working practices
of oﬃce workers and service technicians and the people with whom they interact. Their work
demonstrated the consequences of relying solely on the managers’ or information technology
designers’ understanding of work, and began to argue for the importance of involving workers in
the design of new technologies.
   These workplace studies dealt with: oﬃce workers (Wynn 1979; Suchman 1983; Suchman
and Wynn 1984; Blomberg 1987); service technicians (Orr 1990); and ground operations at an
airport (Brun-Cottan et al. 1991). In her much acclaimed book Plans and Situated Actions,
Suchman gives a profound critique of the then dominant cognitive science approach to tech-
nology design as it relied on an understanding of human activity where plans direct action. She
advocated an alternative view, where plans are seen as potential resources for action but need to
be understood as they unfold in situ (Suchman 1987, 2007).
   Later, the anthropologists at PARC joined forces with computer scientists to ﬁnd ways that
such detailed studies of work practices could inform a participatory approach to the design of
technology. Here we will just mention some of the earlier works, as Chapter 5 goes into more
detail. Suchman and Trigg (1991) and Jordan and Henderson (1995) describe how video
recordings may be used for analysis and design. Blomberg et al. (1990; further developed in
Blomberg et al. 1993) were among the ﬁrst to provide a methodological introduction to the
guiding principles of ethnographically informed analysis when it is conducted as part of tech-
nology design. Ethnographic approaches strive to gain an appreciation for what workers are
doing and how they see things. Blomberg et al. (1993) describe ‘four main principles that guide
much ethnographic work’:

30
                                                                                          Heritage


! [Ethnographers make] a commitment to study the activities of people in their everyday
  settings … as opposed to a laboratory or experimental setting.
! [Ethnographers hold] a belief that particular behaviours can only be understood in the
  everyday context in which they occur.
! Ethnographers describe how people actually behave, not how they ought to behave.
! [E]thnographers are concerned with describing behavior in terms relevant and meaningful to
  study participants. This contrasts with the requirements of survey research where relevant
  categories must be known before the study begins.
                                                             (Blomberg et al. 1993, pp. 125–6)


In the rest of the book you will ﬁnd many examples of how ethnographically informed analysis
has found its way – with or without the involvement of anthropologists – into the design of
work-related technologies, as well as other forms of Participatory Design.


Voice and democracy: theoretical roots for participation
In the deep-rooted system of Participatory Design heritage, there are many theoretical currents
that have served to nurture active involvement in technological design. It was apparent in the
cases described in this chapter that supporting new voices meant breaking with the Cartesian
dualism inherent in traditional computer development work. As Ehn, one of the UTOPIA
project researchers, explained it in Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts,


    The prototypical Cartesian scientist or system designer is an observer. He does not partici-
    pate in the world he is studying, but goes home to ﬁnd the truth about it by deduction
    from the objective facts that he has gathered.
                                                                              (Ehn 1988, p. 52)


And, growing out of the Xerox PARC studies mentioned earlier, Lucy Suchman’s book Plans
and Situated Actions (1987) set the stage for understanding that human actions – in and outside the
workplace – are not simple steps followed according to plans, but rather actions situated in the
concrete situations before us.
   From inside the world of computer science, inﬂuential works such as Winograd and Flores’s
Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design (1986) critiqued the Cartesian
and rationalistic traditions of system design, and set in motion a new framework for under-
standing that ‘in designing tools we are designing ways of being’ (p. xi). And setting these ideas
in motion, Schön’s book, The Reﬂective Practitioner (1979), helped early experimenters under-
stand how both workers and designers could actively reﬂect on their work in the midst of
concrete situations.
   Here we focus on three crucial roots in the early history that both inspired projects and
helped set up working principles and practices: (1) Political economy, workers’ movements
and rights in the struggles between workers and management/capital; (2) Democracy, the
belief in the right of people to express themselves in governments and communities, and its
extension in the workplace and in the design of technology; and (3) Feminism, the grass-roots
movement of women asking questions and initiating change through direct actions.
   There are, in addition, multiple strands of inﬂuential thinkers and writers whose work has
inﬂuenced the need for participatory actions about technologies. Clearly, a movement as broad

                                                                                                31
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


as this has numerous starting points and what are often called ‘birth stories’. Our intention is not
to seek out these ‘birth’ myths, but rather to weave heritage stories together in a pattern that
newcomers can understand. It should be noted that computer system design, as technological
practice, was embedded in top-down thinking, and that books like Understanding Computers and
Cognition (Winograd and Flores 1986), as well as Herbert and Stuart Dreyfus’s Mind over Machine
(Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1986), were instrumental in breaking down the barriers that formal
rule-oriented computer science placed in the way of user participation.
   The early Iron and Metal workers project in Norway was based in a Marxist critique of
capital and the mechanism through which the power of capitalist control pushed workers into
corners where their skills and knowledge were taken away in the interest of faster, cheaper
production. Later projects, such as UTOPIA with the graphic workers, sought to directly
confront management rule with creative worker involvement. These works were inspired by
Braverman’s Labor and Monopoly Capital (1974), which showed that management, acting in the
‘best interests’ of corporate boards and shareholders, got more labour out of workers by a pro-
cess called ‘de-skilling’ – removing the knowledge of workers from their daily tasks and
embedding it into the control of technical systems – both administrative and machine- (com-
puter) driven. In In the Name of Eﬃciency (Greenbaum 1979) Greenbaum showed that the de-
skilling process, while being transported to the very computer programmers and operators who
were thought of as ‘highly’ skilled, was not a natural or inevitable occurrence, and therefore
could be fought.
   For many, the pragmatic philosophy of John Dewey has been inspirational as it addresses
active engagement in creating and maintaining democratic practices. While much of Dewey’s
writing has been directly applied to education, it has resounding notes for Participatory Design
of technologies. At root is the concept of bottom-up active engagement through personal
experience. This means, of course, that ideas and actions that grow out of one’s experience in a
work situation, as in an educational experience, form a cornerstone in shaping the tools that are
applied to that experience. In essence, Dewey’s beliefs go far beyond the idea of user involve-
ment, or simple user-centred design. Like the early heritage cases described in this chapter, his
work seeks not only to help people gain (and retain) knowledge but to use that knowledge
towards broader, more fundamental goals such as freedom and democratic rights.
   On the issue of freedom, for example, Dewey argues that:

     There can be no greater mistake, however, than to treat freedom as an end in itself … For
     freedom from restrictions, the negative side is to be prized only as a means to freedom which
     is power; power to frame purposes; to judge wisely, to evaluate desires by the consequences,
     which will result from acting upon them; power to select and order means to select chosen
     ends into operation.
                                                                               (Dewey 1938, p. 64)

Feminism is a third strand underpinning participatory actions. An integral part of feminism gives
voice to personal experience. In the 1960s, women around the developed world acted upon their
experience and developed grass-roots practices to gain and regain voice and control over their
own lives. By the 1970s and 80s these actions were supported by a wealth of literature giving
voice to previously invisible thoughts and actions. In the sciences, for example, Evelyn Fox Keller
(1985) asked why ‘objectivity’ and ‘impersonal judgment’ were the basis of what was considered
good science. And, by extension, research like the Florence project with nurses asked why
computer systems designed for nurses should be designed by systems professionals without the
experience and personal knowledge of nurses’ daily work (Greenbaum 1990). In fact, today,

32
                                                                                          Heritage


feminist movements, including those now strongly based in developing countries, are giving
voice to previously invisible questions and actions, examples of which will be given in Chapter 10.


Reﬂecting on heritage: guiding principles
The heritage of Participatory Design is not set in stone. Movement from simple involvement to
active participation has many beginnings in diﬀerent situations. However, for those entering the
ﬁeld we oﬀer our interpretation of a set of basic principles. Further, we acknowledge that such
principles have been practised in diﬀerent ways because of power relations in local conditions, as
well as the ethical and political concerns of individual Participatory Design projects.
   Understanding the conditions for and the consequences of ‘in some way’ actively including
people in technology design and implementation has been the glue that keeps this maturing
ﬁeld of academics and professionals together. The principles and practices of these groups have
further been stimulated by ongoing discussions of the theoretical and political underpinning of
participation, as well as experimenting with new ways of developing methods that facilitate
participation.
   While the early cases described in this chapter grew out of strong union movements, the
basic set of beliefs and practices lives on in areas where trade unions are not a central focus of
power relations or may not exist. These principles are based ﬁrmly on:

! Equalising power relations – ﬁnding ways to give voice to those who may be invisible or
  weaker in organisational power structures. Clearly, in the workplace settings described in
  this chapter both management and technical experts had more power than the workers on
  the shop ﬂoor, thus giving voice to workers was a critical starting point. In community and
  local government settings it is important to help people with less money, power or inﬂuence
  to ﬁnd ways of asserting their needs to those in power. This is an integral part of:
! Democratic practices – putting into play the practices and role models for equality among those
  some call ‘stakeholders’. Democracy is often thrown around as a concept that is assumed to
  happen by itself but, as Dewey and others point out, it requires educated and engaged
  people acting on their own interests and in the interests of the common good. The projects
  described here made strides in attempting to bring participants up to speed in this process by
  educating them in technical jargon, where necessary, and engaging them in the process of
  project-building. But democracy does not happen in the abstract, and is rooted in:
! Situation-based actions – working directly with people in their workplace or homes to
  understand actions and technologies in actual settings, rather than through formal abstrac-
  tions. As we saw from the studies in this chapter, the early projects broke the mould by
  moving away from formal, abstract technical description towards activities by and with
  people in their working environment. These actions gave rise to:
! Mutual learning – encouraging and enhancing the understanding of diﬀerent actors by ﬁnding
  common ground and ways of working. As people with technical expertise work with
  workers on the shop ﬂoor – when they actually engage and listen and take note of condi-
  tions and questions – then both the technical experts and the workers have a chance to learn
  from each other. The process of mutual learning can give rise to:
! Tools and techniques – that actually, in practical situations, help diﬀerent actors express their
  needs and visions. These early projects developed a range of techniques for active engage-
  ment through training programmes, paper-based mock-ups, prototypes and workshops.
  Later chapters will describe additional tools and techniques that have been added to a
  participatory repertoire. These tools are important for helping people develop:

                                                                                                33
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


! Alternative visions about technology – whether it be in the workplace, home, public place or
  elsewhere – ideas that can generate expressions of equality and democratic practices. And as
  mentioned earlier, alternative visions about technical choice are diﬃcult to imagine, even
  with new software tools and applications. But the book returns to this issue later on.

The pre-1990 heritage cases described in this chapter each experimented with confronting several
of these guiding principles in order to give people a voice in technology that aﬀected their daily
lives. The following chapters proceed from these roots, expanding on lessons learned and
problems left unsolved.


Notes
 1 Simula, considered the ﬁrst object-oriented programming language, was designed to simulate traﬃc
   ﬂow patterns for streets. Instead of the focus on procedures, which marked all earlier programming
   languages, Simula introduced the concept of objects – or data elements which could be integrated into
   any part of the program.
 2 NJMF is a Norwegian acronym for Norwegian Iron and Metal Workers Union.
 3 DEMOS is a Swedish acronym for Democratic Control and Planning in Working Life.
 4 DUE is a Danish acronym for Democracy, Development and EDP (Electronic Data Processing).


References
Beyer, H. and K. Holtzblatt (1998) Contextual Design: Deﬁning Customer Centered Systems, Waltham, MA:
  Morgan Kaufmann.
Bjerknes, G. and T. Bratteteig (1987) ‘Florence in Wonderland: System development with nurses’, in
  G. Bjerknes, P. Ehn and M. Kyng (eds) Computers and Democracy: A Scandinavian Challenge, Aldershot:
  Avebury, 279–95.
Bjerknes, G. and T. Bratteteig (1988) ‘The memoirs of two survivors’, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
  Computer Supported Cooperative Work, New York: ACM.
Blomberg, J. (1987) ‘Social interaction and oﬃce communication: eﬀects on users’ evaluation of new
  technologies’, in R. Kraut (ed.) Technology and the Transformation of White Collar Work, Hillsdale, NJ:
  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 195–210.
Blomberg, J., J. Giacomi, A. Mosher and P. Swento-Wall (1990) ‘Ethnographic ﬁeld methods and their
  relation to design’, in A. Namioka and D. Schuler (eds) Proceedings of the First Biennial Participatory Design
  Conference, PDC 1990, Seattle, WA, March 31 – April 1, 1990, Palo Alto, CA: CPSR.
Blomberg, J., J. Giacomi, A. Mosher and P. Swento-Wall (1993) ‘Ethnographic ﬁeld methods and their
  relation to design’, in D. Schuler and A. Namioka (eds) Participatory Design: Principles and Practices,
  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 123–55.
Bødker, S., P. Ehn, J. Kammersgaard, M. Kyng and Y. Sundblad (1987) ‘A Utopian experience’, in G.
  Bjerknes, P. Ehn and M. Kyng (eds) Computers and Democracy: A Scandinavian Challenge, Aldershot:
  Avebury, 251–78.
Braverman, H. (1974) Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century, New
  York: Monthly Review Press.
Brun-Cottan, F., K. Forbes, C. Goodwin, M. H. Goodwin, B. Jordan, L. Suchman and R. Trigg (1991)
  Workplace Project: Designing for Diversity and Change Video, Palo Alto, Xerox PARC Video Production,
  Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. Videotape.
Ciborra, C. and L. Schneider (1983) ‘Technology bargaining in Norway’, in U. Briefs, C. Ciborra and L.
  Schneider (eds) Systems Design for, with, and by the Users: Proceedings of the IFIP WG 9.1 Working Con-
  ference on Systems Design for, with, and by the Users, Riva De Sole, Italy, 1982, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
  20–24.
Clement, A. and P. van den Besselaar (1993) ‘A retrospective look at PD projects’, Communications of the
  ACM, 36(6): 29–37.
Demarco, T. (1979) Structured Analysis and System Speciﬁcation, New York: Prentice Hall.
Dewey, J. (1938) Experience and Education, New York: Macmillan.


34
                                                                                                      Heritage


Dreyfus, H. and Dreyfus, S. (1986) Mind over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era
   of the Computer, New York: Free Press.
Ehn, P. (1988) Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts, Stockholm: Arbetslivscentrum.
Ehn, P. and M. Kyng (1984) ‘A tool perspective on design of interactive computer support for skilled
   workers’, in M. Saaksjarvi (ed.) Report of the Seventh Scandinavian Research Seminar on Systemeering,
   Helsinki: ECIS, 211–42.
Ehn, P. and M. Kyng (1987) Computers and Democracy: A Scandinavian Challenge, Avebury: Aldershot.
Ehn, P. and Å. Sandberg (1979) Företagsstyrning och Löntagarmakt, Falköping: Prisma (in Swedish).
Ehn, P. and Å. Sandberg (1983) ‘Local union inﬂuence on technology and work organization: some results
   from the DEMOS Project’, in U. Briefs, C. Ciborra and L. Schneider (eds) Systems Design for, with, and
   by the Users: Proceedings of the IFIP WG 9.1 Working Conference on Systems Design for, with, and by the
   Users, Riva De Sole, Italy, 1982, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 427–37.
Greenbaum, J. (1975) ‘Automation and unemployment: a look at the basic assumptions in the computer
   ﬁeld’, Computers and Society, 6(3): 4–5.
Greenbaum, J. (1979) In the Name of Eﬃciency: Management Theory and Shopﬂoor Practice in Data Processing
   Work, Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Greenbaum, J. (1990) ‘The head and the heart: using gender analysis to study the social creation of com-
   puter systems’, Computers and Society, 20(2): 9–17.
Greenbaum, J. and M. Kyng (1991) Design at Work: Cooperative Design of Computer Systems, Hillsdale, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greenwood, D. and M. Levin (1998) Introduction to Action Research: Social Research for Social Change,
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jacobsen, H., F. Kensing, M. Kyng and L. Mathiassen (1981) Klubarbejde og EDB, Copenhagen: Fremad (in
   Danish).
Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. (1995) ‘Interaction analysis: foundation and practice’, Journal of Learning
   Sciences, 4(1): 39–103.
Jungk, R. and Müllert, N. (1987) Future Workshops: How to Create Desirable Futures, London: Institute for
   Social Inventions.
Keller, E. (1985) Reﬂections on Gender and Science, Cambridge, MA: Yale University Press.
Kensing, F. (1981) ‘Handlingsorienteret partsforskning med fagbevægelsen’, in Å. Sandberg (ed.) Forskning
   for forandring, Stockholm: Arbeidslivscentrum (in Danish).
Kensing, F. (1983) ‘The trade unions’ inﬂuence on technological change’, in U. Briefs, C. Ciborra and L.
   Schneider (eds) Systems Design for, with, and by the Users: Proceedings of the IFIP WG 9.1 Working Con-
   ference on Systems Design for, with, and by the Users, Riva De Sole, Italy, 1982, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Kensing, F. and J. Blomberg (1998) ‘PD meets CSCW – issues and concerns’, Computer Supported
   Cooperative Work – The Journal of Collaborative Computing, 7: 3–4.
Kyng, M. and L. Mathiassen (1982) ‘Systems development and trade union activities’, in N. Bjørn-
   Andersen (ed.) Information Society, For Richer, For Poorer, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 247–60.
Mathiassen, L., B. Rolskov and E. Vedel (1983) ‘Regulating the use of EDP by law and agreement’, in U.
   Briefs, C. Ciborra and L. Schneider (eds) Systems Design for, with, and by the Users: Proceedings of the IFIP
   WG 9.1 Working Conference on Systems Design for, with, and by the Users, Riva De Sole, Italy, 1982,
   Amsterdam: North-Holland, 251–64.
Mumford, E. (1972) ‘Job satisfaction: a method of analysis’, Personnel Review, 1(3): 48–57.
Mumford, E. (1983) Designing Human Systems for New Technology: The ETHICS Method, Manchester:
   Manchester Business School.
Mumford, E. (1993a) ‘The ETHICS approach’, Communications of the ACM, 36(6): 82.
Mumford, E. (1993b) ‘The participation of users in system design: an account of the origin, evolution, and
   use of the ETHICS method’, in D. Schuler and A. Namioka (eds) Participatory Design: Principles and
   Practices, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 257–70.
Mumford, E., F. Land and J. Hawgood (1978) ‘A participative approach to the design of computer sys-
   tems’, Impact of Science on Sociology, 28(3): 235–53.
Norman, D. and S. Draper (1986), User-Centered System Design: New Perspectives on HCI, New York: CRC
   Press.
Nygaard, K. and O. T. Bergo (1975a) ‘The trade unions – new users of research’, Personnel Review, 4(2):
   5–10.
Nygaard, K. and O. T. Bergo (1975b) En vurdering av styrings-og informasjonssystemet KVPOL, Tiden Norsk
   Forlag (in Norwegian).


                                                                                                             35
Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum


Orr, J. E. (1990) ‘Sharing knowledge, celebrating identity: war stories and community memory in a service
  culture’, in D. Middleton and D. Edwards (eds) Collective Remembering: Memory in Society, Newbury
  Park, CA: Sage, 169–89.
Sandberg, Å. (1979) Computers Dividing Man and Work: Recent Scandinavian Research on Planning and Com-
  puters from a Trade Union Perspective, Stockholm: Arbetslivscentrum.
Schön, D. (1979) The Reﬂective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, London: Temple Smith.
Suchman, L. (1983) ‘Oﬃce procedures as practical action: models of work and system design’, ACM
  Transactions on Oﬃce Information Systems, 1(4): 320–8.
Suchman, L. (1987) Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human–Machine Communication, New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Suchman, L. and R. Trigg (1991) ‘Understanding practice: video as a medium for reﬂection and design’, in
  J. Greenbaum and M. Kyng (eds) Design at Work: Cooperative Design of Computer Systems, Hillsdale, NJ:
  Erlbaum Associates, 65–90.
Suchman, L. and E. Wynn (1984) ‘Procedures and problems in the oﬃce’, Oﬃce: Technology and People,
  2(2): 133–54.
Tjørnehøj, H. (1976) Arbejdsmiljøet i jernindustrien, Aarhus, Denmark: Modtryk (in Danish).
Trist, E. (1981) The Evolution of Socio-technical Systems, Toronto: Quality of Working Life Center.
Trist, E., G. W. Higgin, H. Murray and A. B. Pollock (1963) Organizational Choice, London: Tavistock.
Wagner, I. and J. Gärtner (1996) ‘Mapping actors and agendas: political frameworks of systems design and
  participation’, Human–Computer Interaction, 11(3): 187–214.
Whyte, W. (1991) Participatory Action Research, Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Winograd, T. and F. Flores (1986) Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design,
  Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wynn, E. (1979) ‘Oﬃce conversation as an information medium’, unpublished PhD thesis, University of
  California, Berkeley.
Yourdon, E. (1982) Managing the System Life Cycle: A Software Development Methodology Overview, New
  York: Yourdon Press.




36
